California
First-Year
Law Students’
Examination
Essay Questions
and
Selected Answers
October 2003
-i-
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
OCTOBER 2003 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS’ EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2003 California First Year
Law Students’ Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the
examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in
spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here
with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the
essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number Subject Page
1. Contracts 1
2. Criminal Law 10
3. Contracts 20
4. Torts 31
-ii-
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the
difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and
fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand
the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their
relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason
in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not
merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your
proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit.
State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal
doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general
application.
-1-
Question 1
Rita is beginning a new business as a painter. In order to attract clients, she printed
hundreds of flyers that said, “Rita can paint your home for $2,000—Call Rita now to accept
this offer!” Each flyer also contained contact information for Rita, including her telephone
number. Rita placed the flyers in the local grocery store where neighborhood residents
would be likely to see them.
Marvin picked up a flyer and decided to call Rita. He owned a very large home in an
adjoining town. Marvin knew that $2,000 for painting his home would be a tremendous
bargain for him. He telephoned Rita, and when she answered the phone, Marvin said, “I
accept your offer to paint my home for $2,000. Please start as soon as possible.” Before
Rita could say a word, Marvin blurted out his home address and abruptly hung up.
Sue also telephoned Rita and asked about having her garage painted. Rita informed Sue
that she would have to come to Sue’s home before providing a bid, and the two got
together at Sue’s home later that day. After looking over the garage and negotiating the
particulars of the paint job, Rita told Sue that she would paint the garage for $700. Sue
responded that $700 was a “pretty good price,” but that she wished Rita would do the job
for less and needed to consider her options. The following morning, Sue left a phone
message on Rita’s answering machine saying that she had decided to accept Rita’s offer.
Rita also received a recorded phone message from Mary, another possible new client,
stating, “I saw your flyer in the grocery store. If you can paint my house for $2,000, the job
is yours.” The message provided Mary’s address. After Rita drove past Mary’s house to
look at the prospective job, she decided to paint Mary’s house. The next day Rita went to
Mary’s home, with all the necessary painting supplies, but when she started working on
Mary’s home, Mary came running outside and told Rita to stop painting the house, as she
had found a different painting contractor for the job.
Does Rita have enforceable contracts with either Marvin, Sue, or Mary? Discuss.
-2-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
Rita v. Marvin
Common Law
The common law applies to contracts for services. Rita (hereinafter “R”) was offering to
paint the houses of others. This is a service. Therefore, the common law would apply to
this contract.
Formation
Preliminary negotiations
R is offering to paint the houses of others. In order to promote her business, she has
placed flyers at a local grocery store. These flyers purport to be an offer, creating in
Marvin, and others, the power of acceptance.
Offer I
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent, which is definite in terms,
and is communicated to the offeree.
The flyers contain several essential terms.
Subject matter: Painting of houses
Price: $2,000
Quantity: Would be “one” (house) per person
However, the flyer lacked the other essential terms, such as the identity of the parties and
the time of performance.
Marvin will argue that the flyer was sufficiently definite. He will argue that R impliedly
agreed to paint his house for the aforementioned price. He will assert that in so doing, she
manifested present contractual intent and communicated the offer to him.
However, because the flyer lacked several essential terms, it would probably not be
considered a valid offer.
-3-
Offer II
Defined supra
After seeing the flyer, Marvin called R. When R answered, he blurted out an acceptance
of the “offer” and provided his name and address. These terms would fill in the remaining
essential terms, identity of the parties and would include the time of performance.
When Marvin called R, he manifested a present contractual intent, to be bound to the terms
of a contract. He also communicated his offer to R.
Therefore, Marvin’s phone call would probably be a valid offer.
Acceptance
An acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
Marvin hung up the phone before R was able to answer his offer. Therefore, she was
never able to manifest an assent to the terms of his offer.
Therefore, no valid acceptance has probably occurred.
Since there is no valid acceptance, there is probably no enforceable contract between R
and Marvin.
RITA v. SUE
Common law
For reasons mentioned supra, this contract will be governed by the common law.
Formation
Offer
Defined supra
Again, the flyer would not be considered an offer, but rather an invitation to bid.
Sue (hereinafter “S”) called R. S and R met at S’s house, where R looked over S’s garage
and provided S with an estimate in regard to painting the garage. R told S that she would
paint S’s garage for $700. This means that the terms of the offer would be
Quantity: One
Time of performance: As soon as possible
-4-
Identity of the parties: S and R
Price: $700
Subject matter: painting the garage
All the terms requisite for an offer are present. R manifested present contractual intent,
indicating that she would be bound by the terms of the contract. R communicated the offer
to S.
Therefore, a valid offer probably exists, and it is in the power of S to accept the offer.
Acceptance
Defined supra
An offer may be accepted for as long as it is held open. In this case, the offer was oral,
made in the presence of S, to her person. Such an offer would terminate if and when R left
S without having a definitive acceptance.
S will argue that she accepted the offer, unequivocally, when she left the message on R’s
answering machine. Such an acceptance is unequivocal.
However, S had stated the price was pretty good, but wished that R would do the job for
less. R left without S having provided an assent at that time.
Therefore, because the offer was oral, it had to be accepted while R was with S. R did not
impliedly or expressly leave the offer open for any time.
Therefore, because R did not leave the offer open and because S did not accept while R
was present, the offer probably terminated upon R’s departure. There is probably no valid
acceptance. However, S’s message would probably operate as a counter offer.
RITA v. MARY
Common law
For reasons discussed supra, the common law would probably apply to this contract.
Formation
Offer
Defined supra
Again, the flyer would probably not be an offer, but an invitation to bid.
-5-
Mary called R and left a message on R’s machine. The messages [sic] stated that if R
would paint Mary’s house for $2,000, the job was R’s job. This message would probably
contain all the essential terms of an offer.
Quantity: One house
Time of performance: Within the reasonable future
Identity of the parties: Mary and R
Price: $2,000
Subject matter: The house
All the terms for a common law offer are present. When Mary called R and left a message
on the machine, she manifested a desire to be bound to the contract, thus indicated
present contractual intent. Because the message was left on the machine, the intent was
communicated to R, the offeree.
Additionally, this offer looks toward a return performance, not a return promise. Therefore,
a court may construe the contract as a unilateral contract.
Revocation
This occurs when an offeror attempt [sic] to withdraw her offer.
When R started painting, Mary came running out of the house, stating that she had a
different contractor. Mary will assert that she effectively revoked her offer before R
accepted, since R never accepted by a return promise (see infra).
In order to defeat this attempted revocation, R will assert the detrimental reliance on offer
rule.
Detrimental Reliance on offer rule
This rule provides that where the offeror should reasonably foresee that her offer would
result in reliance on the part of the offeree, resulting in action or forbearance to act, the
offer will be held open for a reasonable time to avoid injustice.
Here, Mary made an offer which she should have reasonably foreseen as to induce action
on the part of R. R acted, purchasing the paint and beginning performance. A court will
probably hold this offer open for a reasonable time to avoid injustice.
Additionally, should R’s arguments fail, she would be able to assert the unilateral contract
rule.
-6-
Unilateral contract rule
Where an offeror makes an offer which can be accepted only by full performance, the offer
will be held open once performance begins, in order to avoid injustice.
As mentioned supra, the offer looks to a unilateral contract. Therefore, a court will probably
see that R began performance, and will thus hold the contract open for a reasonable time
to allow R time to complete performance.
Acceptance
Defined supra
R never orally assented to the terms of the offer. However, she appeared at Mary’s house
and began painting. As mentioned supra, the offer looked to a unilateral contract.
Therefore, R’s performance of the offer would probably be sufficient grounds upon which
to argue an acceptance.
Therefore, since R began performance and since the offer would probably be held open
for a reasonable time, a court probably will find a valid contract.
Consideration
This is a bargained for exchange, with each party incurring detriment and receiving a
benefit.
R would incur the detriment of painting the house. S would receive the benefit fo a newly
painted house. S would incur the detriment of paying. R would receive the benefit of the
payment.
A valid contract probably exists between R and Mary.
-7-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
Service Contracts
All 3 potential contracts deal with services and therefore are governed by common law
contract theories. A contract requires an offer and acceptance which show mutual assent
and consideration.
Marvin and Rita
Offer: An offer is the manifestation of the present intent and ability to enter into a bargain
that is communicated to the offeree.
In this case, Marvin will attempt to take advantage of the $2,000 price to paint his large
home by claiming that when Rita distributed hundreds of flyers stating “Rita can paint your
home for $2,000–call Rita now to accept this offer.” It was an offer. An offer must have
specific and definite terms. Traditionally, an offer had to have quantity, time of
performance, the identity of the parties, the price and the subject matter. Marvin will argue
that it was definite enough because the subject matter (house), parties (Marvin & Rita),
quantity (1 house) and price were all present. In fact, this would be enough modernly as
the courts will construe “reasonable” terms in order to complete the contract. However,
unfortunately for Marvin it is well establish[ed] that advertisements are only “invitations to
negotiate” and are rarely specific enough to amount to an offer. It is debatable whether
hundreds of flyers are simply invitations to negotiate or offers. If the flyer had been placed
on Marvin’s house then he would have a stronger argument that Rita did in fact intend to
be bound by the terms in her flyer. However, Rita placed the flyers at a neighborhood
grocery store where neighborhood residents would be likely to see them. Marvin, who lived
in the adjoining town was apparently not one of the people that Rita had intended to
contract with. Therefore, it cannot be firmly established that there was an offer by Rita.
Acceptance
An acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
In the case of Marvin and Rita, Marvin clearly attempted to accept Rita’s offer by saying “I
accept your offer to paint my home for $2,000.” However, because no offer existed there
was no power of acceptance in Marvin as he was not the intended person.
Consideration
Valid consideration would exist in this case. Consideration is a bargained for exchange that
is a legal detriment and benefit. In this case, Marvin paying $2,000 and Rita painting the
house.
However, because of the lack of a valid offer no contract exists between Marvin and Rita.
-8-
Contract between Rita and Sue
Preliminary negotiations
When Sue and Rita got together to discuss the particulars and go over Sue’s home they
were engaged in preliminary negotiations.
Offer
Defined supra
When Rita told Sue she would paint her house for $700 there was a valid offer as she
clearly had an intent to be bound. The quantity (1 house) identity of parties (Rita and Sue)
price ($700), and subject matter (house) were all accounted for. The time of performance
would be a reasonable time.
Acceptance
Defined supra
When Sue told Rita “that is a pretty good price” and she would consider her options a valid
acceptance had not yet occurred. However, this was also not a rejection of the offer nor
a counter offer by Sue and the power of acceptance was not extinguished. It could be
argued that when Sue said “I wish you could do the job for less” this was a rejection.
However, rejections must be definite to be effective in either conduct or expressions such
as “I reject your offer.” This did not occur and therefore the offer was still open until Rita
decided to revoke it or it lapsed.
When Sue called Rita’s house the next morning a timely and effective acceptance
occurred. An offer can be accepted at any time prior to revocation and is effective upon
dispatch. Generally, acceptance must take place in the same manner as the offer. In both
instances it was oral and therefore a valid acceptance.
Consideration - defined supra
There is valid consideration as Sue is paying $700 and Rita is obligated to paint the house.
There is a valid contract.
Defense to formation
Statute of Frauds
If either party wanted to get out of the contract it is arguable that they could argue that paint
is a good and therefore falls within the statute of frauds requirement that contracts for
goods over $500 must be in waiting. However, this argument is week [sic] because
-9-
painting jobs are predominately a service provided by the painter and the cost of the paint
does not compare with the cost of labor.
Rita and Mary
Offer
Defined supra
When Mary called Rita and said “if you can paint my house for $2,000 the job is yours” she
made a valid offer to Rita although time of performance is also missing here. It is unclear
whether this offer was for a bilateral or unilateral contract.
Unilateral Offer and Acceptance
It could be argued that Mary made an offer for a unilateral contract by essentially saying
“if you paint my house I will give you $2,000 dollars.” This appears to be what Mary was
stating. If so, the offer can still be revoked at any time prior to acceptance and in this case
acceptance was complete performance. However, modernly courts have held that if a
person substantially performs on a unilateral contract that is an acceptance. However, the
facts state that Rita “started working” and therefore there is no substantial performance and
no acceptance and therefore no contract.
Bilateral Offer and Acceptance
If it is construed that Mary’s offer was intended to receive a promise as consideration
instead of an act then it was necessary for Rita to accept by conduct or expression. Rita
will argue that her conduct of beginning the painting clearly showed that she had accepted
the offer and promised to paint the house. Mary will counter that she only wanted a
promise to paint the house.
There is valid consideration.
There appears to be an enforceable contract.
-10-
Question 2
Able was low on money and short on credit, so he borrowed money from a loan shark who
was associated with organized crime. When Able failed to meet the repayment deadline,
the loan shark told Able he had one more day to come up with the money or Able would
find it “very, very painful.”
Frightened and desperate, Able decided to break into the home of Rich and steal a
collection of valuable antique coins. (Able had done some carpentry jobs for Rich on
occasion, so he was familiar with his home.) Able knew that the coin collection was kept
in a safe in a small room in Rich’s home, so he asked Baker to help him with the heist.
Baker was a master welder and Able knew Baker’s skills would come in handy if they were
to steal the coins. Baker agreed and brought a blowtorch with him that night. Able and
Baker easily gained entry to the house by cutting a hole in the back door and entered
through the hole. They quickly disabled the alarm system and then Baker went to work on
the safe with his blowtorch. They had nearly gotten the safe open when Able knocked over
the blowtorch. It ignited some curtains nearby and the fire quickly spread. Soon the whole
structure was ablaze. Able and Baker fled without having taken anything.
Sam and Carol lived next door to Rich and the fire soon jumped from Rich’s home to their
residence. Carol woke up, smelled the smoke, and ran into the living room. Her husband,
Sam, was sleeping on the couch. Carol was very angry with Sam. He had told her earlier
that evening that he wanted a divorce and Carol now saw a chance for revenge. Carol ran
from the burning house, leaving him asleep on the couch. By the time Sam awoke, the
house was full of flames and heavy dark smoke. He tried to exit the house, but was quickly
overcome by the fire and died.
What crimes, if any, have been committed by Able, Baker, and Carol, and what defenses
should each assert? Discuss.
-11-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
Crimes of Able and Baker
Solicitation
Solicitation occurs when a person counsels, solicits, incites, or requests another person to
do an unlawful act. When Able “asked Baker” to help him with “the heist,” Able committed
solicitation because he requested Baker to participate in a burglary and larceny (discussed
infra).
Merger Rule
Solicitation mergers with the target crime and with attempt and conspiracy. Therefore,
although Able committed solicitation, he will most likely be charged instead with conspiracy
and with the other crimes discussed infra.
Conspiracy
A conspiracy exists when two or more people are in an agreement to commit a criminal or
unlawful act or to commit a lawful act by unlawful or criminal means. When Baker “agreed”
to Able’s solicitation, a conspiracy was formed and both Able and Baker may be charged
with conspiracy to commit burglary and conspiracy to commit larceny.
Burglary
Burglary, at common law, is the breaking and entering of the dwelling house of another
during the nighttime with the intent to commit a felony therein.
Breaking – Able (A) and Baker (B) gained entry to Rich’s house by cutting a hole in the
back door with a blowtorch. This constitutes a breaking because they made a hole.
Entering – the facts state that A and B entered Rich’s house through the hole they had
made in the back door.
Dwelling – A and B broke into and entered Rich’s home, which is a dwelling.
Night – The facts state that B brought a blowtorch with him “that night,” which indicates the
burglary occurred at nighttime.
Intent to Commit a Felony – the facts state that A and B intended to steal valuable antique
coins. It is likely that the value of the coins was over $500, which means that stealing them
would be a felony, so intent to commit a felony is established. Even if it turns out that the
coins’ value was [sic] less than $500, most jurisdictions have statutorily modified the intent
required for burglary to include intent to commit any theft, including petty theft.
-12-
Therefore, A and B can be charged with burglary.
Attempted Larceny
An attempt occurs when a criminal intent becomes accompanied by an act which comes
within close proximity of committing a crime.
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another
with intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
A and B intended to steal Rich’s valuable antique coins. This indicates that they had the
criminal intent to commit larceny because the coins belonged to Rich, A and B had no right
to them, and they presumably intended to permanently deprive Rich of the coins. They
broke into the house with a blowtorch and disabled the alarm system. B then tried to get
the safe open. Their breaking in and trying to get the coins from the safe were overt acts
and they came within very close proximity of completing their goal of larceny.
However, because of the fire which A started when he knocked over the blowtorch, A and
B were forced to flee. This cannot be considered as a withdrawal because it was not a
voluntary withdrawal (they were forced to flee because of the fire) and because they were
already in the zone of perpetration.
Therefore, both A and B can be charged with attempted larceny.
Arson
Arson, at common law, is the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another. Here,
since Rich’s home was the location of the fire, the element of the dwelling house of another
is met. Since the facts state that the “structure was ablaze” it indicates that the house was
actually burned. Therefore the issue is whether the burning can be considered malicious.
While it appears that A and B did not have the intent to burn Rich’s house, malice includes
an intent to commit a dangerous felony. Therefore, a court may conclude that while they
did not have specific intent to burn the house, their intent to commit a dangerous felony
such as burglary and larceny will suffice for malice. If the court so determines, then A and
B may be charged with arson.
A and B will argue this issue, especially because of the death of Sam as a result of the fire.
They will maintain that they did not intend to start the fire (or cause the death, which is
discussed below) and that it was an accident. However, in light of the fact that they were
using a blowtorch, it seems foreseeable that a fire could start. B may argue that as a
master welder, it was not foreseeable that he would start a fire with the torch. However,
since B and A were co-conspirators, A’s kicking over of the torch will be attributed as an
act of both A and B.
-13-
Further, since the fire spread from Rich’s house to Sam and Carol’s house, A and B will be
charged with arson as to both homes.
Homicide
Homicide is the killing of one human being by another human being. Sam died as a result
of the fire started by A and B and is therefore a homicide.
Causation
Actual Cause
“But for” the fire started by A and B, Sam would not have died. Therefore, the fire was an
actual cause of Sam’s death. If the court determines, as is likely according to the
discussion of arson supra, A and B will be deemed to be actual causes of Sam’s death.
Proximate Cause
As discussed under arson, the fire was a foreseeable result of A and B’s burglary and
attempted larceny. However, A and B will argue that Carol’s refusal to wake Sam was an
intervening act which breaks the chain of causation. However, since it would have been
just as foreseeable for Sam to have been alone in his home with no one available to waken
him, and since it would have been foreseeable for Carol to have also died, the lack of
awakening Sam will not break the chain of causation and A and B will be held to be the
proximate cause of Sam’s death.
Murder
Murder is the killing of one human being by another human being with malice aforethought.
Malice aforethought can be found through the commission of a dangerous felony, so A and
B will be charged with the murder of Sam.
Murder in the First Degree
Murder in the first degree can be charged as a result of a death that occurs during the
commission of a dangerous felony, that is, through the application of the Felony Murder
Rule.
Burglary is considered to be a dangerous felony which can be used for application of the
felony murder rule. The death must also be found to be causally connected to the burglary.
This is satisfied in this case because if A and B had not burglarized Rich’s home with the
blowtorch, the fire would not have started. Therefore, the death of Sam is directly
attributable to the burglary and the felony murder rule will attach.
-14-
Therefore, A and B can be charged with the murder in the first degree of Sam.
Defenses
Duress
In addition to the arguments already discussed under each crime above, Able will argue
that he acted under duress because the loan shark had threatened him with something
“very, very painful.” However, the threat was related to a future harm, not an imminent one.
Public policy would favor calling the police, not committing a burglary when a person is
threatened. So the defense of duress will fail.
State v. Carol
Murder
Carol saw a “chance for revenge” and so chose not to awaken Sam to save him from the
fire. The question is whether she can be charged with Sam’s murder or a related crime.
Omission
Normally, the actus reus of a crime must be by intentional or volitional act. Here, Carol did
not “do” anything to Sam to kill him. Her actus reus would be an act of omission in not
awakening him. When a person has not created the situation which caused the death of
another, that person is usually under no duty to rescue the endangered person. While
under tort law, a close relationship like that of husband and wife may impose a duty of
acting to save the other, criminal law is less likely to impose guilt for such a failure to act.
Carol did not start the fire which killed Sam and even though the facts indicate that she had
the appropriate mens rea by wanting revenge and allowing him to die, Carol cannot be held
criminally liable for the fire she did not start, nor for the death that resulted from that fire.
Therefore, Carol will not be charged with any crime related to Sam’s death.
-15-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
What crimes, if any, have been committed by Able, Baker, and Carol, and what defenses
should each assert?
I. Crimes of Able
A. Is Able guilty of solicitation?
Solicitation occurs when the defendant request [sic] that another commit a crime. It is not
necessary that the other agree or even acknowledge the communication.
The facts tell us that Able asked Baker to help him steal the valuable antique coins. The
act of asking is sufficient for Able to be convicted of solicitation.
B. Able for Conspiracy
Conspiracy occurs when the defendant agrees with another to commit a crime. The crime
is complete at the time of the agreement. Thus the plan need not succeed for the
defendants to be convicted.
The facts tell us that Baker agreed to Able’s proposal to steal the coins.
Some jurisdictions require an act of furtherance of the crime for the defendant to be
convicted of conspiracy.
Here Baker and Able did commit a number of act [sic] and almost succeeded in their plan
had it not been for the fire. Therefore, both Able and Baker can be convicted of conspiracy.
C. Able for Burglary
Burglary is the breaking and entering of the dwelling house of another at night with the
intent to commit a felony inside.
Modern courts have abandoned the “at night” requirement (common law) and have
extended the “dwelling house” requirement to include any structure.
Since Able and Baker gained access to Rich’s house by cutting a hole in the back door they
most certainly committed a breaking and entering.
The facts tell us that the defendants entered Rich’s home.
The facts also tell us that the defendants intended to commit larceny (steal the valuable
coins).
-16-
Based on the discussion above, Able (and Baker) are guilty of burglary.
D. Arson
Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another. Mere charring of the
structure is sufficient. Modern court [sic] have extended this doctrine to include commercial
structures as well.
Was the burning malicious?
The facts tell us that the defendants did not intend to burn Rich’s house. Therefore they
will most likely be found not guilty of arson.
E. Murder of Sam
Even though defendants did not intend the death of Sam, under the felony-murder rule a
defendant is guilty of second degree murder if he causes a homicide in the cause of
committing an inherently dangerous felony.
A homicide is the killing of one human being by another.
Was burglary an inherently dangerous felony?
Burglary is an inherently dangerous felony because it involves the risk that the occupants
of the home will be present at the time the defendants break and enter into the home and
that a confrontation may result which may become deadly.
Therefore Able and Baker are most likely guilty of the death of Sam.
F. Able for attempted larceny
The crime of larceny occurs when defendant commits an [sic] trespassing taking of the
personal property of another with an intent to permanently deprive them of that property.
An attempt is committed when the defendant has the mental state recognized for the
commission of the target offense and has completed a substantial step toward the
completion of the target offense but cannot be convicted of the target offense.
A lesser-included offense is an offense which consist [sic] of some but not all of the
elements of another crime and no other elements.
The facts tell us that Able and Baker intended to steal the valuable coins. Since they were
unsuccessful in stealing the coins, but were very close to doing so they can be convicted
of attempt.
-17-
However, since larceny is a lesser included offense of the crime of burglary the defendants
cannot be convicted of both.
II. Crimes of Baker
A. Conspiracy
See discussion above. Baker is guilty since he agreed with Able to commit larceny and
took a substantial step.
B. Burglary
See discussion above. Baker is guilty of burglary since he committed a breaking and
entering of the dwelling house of Rich with an intent to commit a felony inside (steal the
coins).
C. Arson
See discussion above (Able). Just like Able, Baker will most likely be found not liable for
arson since he lacked the malicious intent.
D. Murder of Sam
See discussion above (Able). Similarly to Able, Baker will be guilty of second degree
murder under the felony-murder rule.
E. Attempted Larceny
See discussion above.
III. Crimes of Carol
To decide whether Carol is guilty of a homicide we must examine the murder crimes.
These fall into four categories; (1) First Degree, (2) Second degree (3) Voluntary
Manslaughter and (4) involuntary Manslaughter.
Generally, all crimes require (1) mens rea - a requisite mental state, (2) actus reus - a
voluntary act or an omission to act when one has a duty to act, (3) concurrence, & (4)
causation – the act must cause the criminal result.
The general rule is that one has no duty to act to prevent the commission of a crime or a
tort against another.
-18-
However, there are a number of exceptions to this rule. One has a duty to act when (1) he
is related to the victim (i.e., spouse or parent, only close relatives) (2) contractual duty (as
in guards) (3) [sic]
Did Carol possess the necessary mens-rea?
The facts tell us that Carol was angry at Sam because he had informed her that he desired
a divorce. They also tell us that she “wanted a revenge”, and that she took advantage of
the situation to execute that revenge.
Did Carol commit the necessary act?
As stated above, Carol does not have to perform an act, but a mere failure to perform an
act when she has a duty to act reasonably under the circumstances to aid her husband.
Was there concurrence?
Yes, the mens-rea and actus reus concurred.
Was there causation?
Yes, Carol’s failure to wake up Sam caused his death. All that was necessary for Carol to
do was wake him up. Therefore, Carol is guilty of second-degree murder.
IV. Defenses
A. Defenses of Able
(a) Duress.
Duress negates the intent to commit a crime. Where defendant has been threatened with
physical force he may rely on the defense of duress. However, the force or the threat of
force must be imminent where the force is to occur sometime in the future. The defendant
cannot claim that he is under duress because the defendant had the ability to move around
freely and could have informed the police or filed charges against the loan shark.
B. Defenses of Carol
Carol can assert the defense of depraved-heart. She can claim that the fact that Sam had
asked her for a divorce had caused her to snap and that she was not capable of thinking
straight or controlling her emotions. She will argue that her sentence should be reduced
to voluntary manslaughter. One is guilty of voluntary manslaughter when he acts in the
heat of passion (i.e., when they witness a spouse cheating), or when they rely on imperfect
self-defense (i.e., when they thought that they had a right to use self-defense but the force
they used was disproportionately greater than the force that was necessary). Since a lot
-19-
of time had passed between the moment Sam requested the divorce and the time of
Carol’s failure to wake him up this defense will most likely fail.
-20-
Question 3
Paintco intended to place a bid on the painting work for a large government project, the
deadline for which was April 16. Paintco’s president published an advertisement in a local
trade paper asking paint suppliers to place bids with Paintco for the furnishing of 10,000
gallons of special paint in accordance with the government’s specifications. The
advertisement, published March 1, stated that Paintco was going to bid on the government
job, and asked all interested parties to submit their bids, in writing, on or before April 15,
specifying that the bids were to be “irrevocable for 30 days.”
On the evening of April 15, Ritzcorp’s president telephoned Paintco and submitted
Ritzcorp’s bid orally by leaving a message on Paintco’s answering machine, which was
equipped with a voice-decoding feature that translated telephone messages into a written
printout. The telephone message, which Paintco’s president both heard and read that
evening, identified the speaker as Ritzcorp’s president and stated that his company would
supply 8,500 gallons of paint to Paintco at a price of $10 per gallon. The telephone
message also stated that the bid price did not include the cost of delivery, that any
acceptance of Ritzcorp’s bid must be in writing and must be received by Ritzcorp on or
before May 1.
Because Ritzcorp’s bid was the lowest, Paintco used it to compute the price of its own
irrevocable bid to the government the next day. On May 1, Paintco was notified that it had
won the government contract. The same day it mailed a letter to Ritzcorp stating: “We
accept your offer of April 15, but ask that the paint be fully warranted as to quality and that
you arrange for delivery of 10,000 gallons of the paint to the job site.” The letter arrived at
Ritzcorp’s offices on May 2. Ritzcorp dispatched an e-mail to Paintco that very afternoon,
stating that in light of an unexpected rise in the cost of ingredients it was only prepared to
offer a price per gallon of $12, and that any paint Paintco chose to purchase would be sold
“as is,” without any warranties. After subsequent talks between the parties failed to resolve
their differences, Paintco promptly secured a commitment from the next lowest bidder,
BrushCorp, to supply all 10,000 gallons at a price of $14 per gallon. Paintco then
immediately wrote a letter to Ritzcorp declaring that Ritzcorp had repudiated its contractual
commitment to supply paint, and threatening to hold it accountable for all damages.
Paintco completed the government job using the paint supplied by BrushCorp.
What action(s) can Paintco reasonably assert against Ritzcorp, and what would be the
likely result of these action(s)? Discuss.
-21-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
PAINTCO v. RITZCORP
U.C.C. v. COMMON LAW
The U.C.C. governs contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are moveable and identifiable
chattle at the time of sale.
Paint is a moveable and identifiable chattle at the time of sale.
Thus, this contract will be governed by the U.C.C.
MERCHANTS
One who regularly deals in the sale and manufacture of goods and who holds himself out
to have special skill or knowledge in said goods.
Paintco (P) regularly deals in the sale and manufacture of paint, and holds himself out to
have special skill or knowledge in paint.
Ritzcorp (R) regularly deals in the sale and manufacture of paint, and holds himself out to
have special skill or knowledge in paint.
Both P and R will be held by a higher standard of good faith.
Thus, both parties are merchants.
PRELIMINARY NEGOTIATIONS
ADVERTISEMENT
Here, the facts indicate that P made an [sic] public offer to all subcontractors inviting them
to place their bids with P. In [sic] invitation to bid is usually held to be an advertisement and
not an offer.
There is a valid advertisement for an invitation to bargain.
Although P was not making an offer, the courts will find that as a merchant, P must keep
the offer open in good faith for a period of no more than 30 days.
The parties are in preliminary negotiations.
-22-
OFFER
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is certain and definite in its
terms and which is communicated to the offeree.
Here, the facts indicate that R made an outward manifestation of present contractual intent.
Under the U.C.C. the only element required for a valid offer is the quantity term. All the
other terms that are not present will be determined in a reasonable way.
Quantity - 8,500 Gallons
Time for performance - April 16th
Identity of parties - P and R
Price - $10/Gallon = $85,000
Subject Matter - Paint
Therefore, under the U.C.C. all the required terms are present.
MERCHANT’S FIRM OFFER RULE
A signed written offer by a merchants [sic] which promises that it will be held open for a
time stated without consideration will be held open (or if time is stated then for a reasonable
time) taken that the offer does not stay open for more than 3 months.
The facts indicate that when R made the offer it promised that the offer would be held open
until May 1.
Here, P will argue that there was no writing but that the offer was made orally. The facts
tell us that the oral offer was translated into a written document. The courts will probably
find that the signature requirement would be satisfied if there was an electronic type of R’s
name or company name.
The courts will probably construe this oral offer as a written document based on the facts.
Thus, there is a valid offer.
ACCEPTANCE
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is certain and definite in its
terms.
-23-
Since this contract is being governed by the U.C.C. its acceptance will be determined by
U.C.C. 2-207.
U.C.C. 2-207
Where an offeror makes a seasonable [sic] expression of acceptance and assent to the
terms of an offer, which may be accepted with additional or different terms unless
acceptance is expressly limited to the terms of the offer.
Here we find that on May 1 P sent written acceptance to R of its mutual assent to the terms
of the contract.
However, the facts tell us that the acceptance was made with additional and different
terms.
There are three ways in which an additional or different term can be excluded from an
acceptance:
1. Acceptance is expressly limited to the terms of the offer
2. The Acceptance materially alters the contract
3. The Acceptance does not give the offeror reasonable time to accept the additional or
different terms.
Additional Terms
The additional term was that P asked R to fully warrant the quality of the paint.
In the facts at issue the court will find that the warranty for merchantability of the product
was not expressly limited to terms of the offer, and that this additional fact did not materially
alter the contract.
In addition R had a reasonable time to reject the terms of the offer.
Thus, the courts will find that this warranty promise will be included in the acceptance.
Different Terms
The different terms was [sic] that P asked R for 10,000 gallons instead of the 8,500 gallons.
Where there are different terms two rules will determine whether they stay in the
acceptance or not:
Knockout Rule
The different terms will be knocked out of the contract if they materially alter the contract.
-24-
In this situation the increase of the gallons from 8,500 to 10,000 will be held as materially
altering the contract.
Thus, this terms [sic] will be knocked out of the contract.
Dropout Rule
The different terms will be dropped out if they materially alter the contract.
Since this different term materially alters the contract it will be dropped out of the contract.
Thus the courts will find that the warranty term will be included in the terms, but that the
increase in gallons will be excluded.
CONSIDERATION
A bargained for exchange of legal detriment.
P bargained for $10/gallon, his detriment, in exchange for 8,500 gallons, his benefit. R
bargained for 8,500, his detriment in exchange for $10/gallon.
Thus, there is valid consideration.
DEFENSES
STATUTE OF FRAUDS
Contracts for the sale of goods of $500 or more
Here the facts indicate that this contract was for the price of $85,000. Thus a writing would
be required under the U.C.C. Statute of Frauds.
Since a sufficient memorandum will suffice for the Statute of Frauds, the written
agreements that have been sent between the parties will take the contract out of the
Statute of Frauds.
Thus, the Statute of Frauds will not apply.
MODIFICATION
Under the U.C.C. a modification can be made to the contract without consideration, but in
good faith.
Here the facts indicate that R sent a written e-mail to P stating that he would like to modify
the contract due to unexpected rise in the cost of the gallons.
-25-
An unexpected rise in the cost of the gallons will not be acceptable since the party should
have foreseen or had a reason to know of the change in price.
Also, R attempted to sell the gallons as is.
Under the U.C.C. any modification that attempts to change the warranty term will be
considered to materially alter the contract and thus be invalid.
Here the courts will find that under the U.C.C. 2-207 Battle of Forms discussed supra,
these terms would materially alter the contract.
Thus, these terms will not be considered as valid modifications.
CONDITIONS
IMPLIED IN FACT CONDITION PRECEDENT OF GOOD FAITH
Every contract has an implied in fact condition precedent of good faith.
In this case, R would be required to ship, in good faith, the gallons, before P had a duty to
make payment under the contract.
CONDITIONS SATISFIED OR EXCUSED
ANTICIPATORY REPUDIATION
R will argue that P repudiated the contract and thus excused his condition to make
payment.
DUTY
R has a duty to ship 8,500 gallons of paint for $10/gallon.
DUTY DISCHARGED
IMPRACTICABILITY
R will argue that it was impracticable for him to perform under the contract since the price
increased from $10 to $12. However, based on the 10 TIMES RULE, there is no
impracticability.
Thus, there is no impracticability.
-26-
FRUSTRATION OF PURPOSE
R may argue Frustration of purpose, but there will be no discharged [sic] because there
was not objective frustration of purpose for the contract.
IMPOSSIBILITY
R may argue Impossibility, but the court will find not destruction of the goods or the
contract.
BREACH
MAJOR BREACH
R committed a major breach when it did not agree to ship the goods for $10/gallon. This
breach went to the heart of the contract.
REMEDIES
GENERAL DAMAGES
P will be able to recover his loss of expectancy under the contract. He will be placed in the
position he would have been had the contract not been breached.
Cover
P mitigated his losses when he bought the goods from Brushcorp (B). He will be able to
recover the difference in the contract price and the cost of cover.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
If the damages were consequential and foreseeable at the time of the contract, then P will
be able to recover damages under Hadly v. Baxendale.
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE
If the goods were considered special or unique P may be able to recover specific
performance.
-27-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
PAINTCO AND RITZCORP
Does the UCC apply?
The UCC applies to all transactions in goods. Goods are moveable, tangible property.
Here, the transaction is for the sale of paint, moveable tangible property.
Therefore, the UCC applies.
Are the parties merchants?
Merchants are persons who regularly deal in that type of goods or, through their
occupation, have special knowledge and skill pertaining to the goods.
Here, Paintco is a professional painting company, who regularly buys paint. Ritzcorp sells
paint.
Therefore, both parties are merchants.
Valid enforceable contract?
In order to have a valid enforceable contract, there must be an offer, acceptance,
consideration and lack of defenses.
Was the ad an offer?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent, containing definite and certain
terms, communicated to an identified offeree.
An advertisement such as a printed flyer or trade paper ad is normally considered to be an
invitation to make offers, because the offeror could not possibly accept an infinite number
of acceptances.
Here, Paintco’s ad was an invitation to negotiate or make offers.
Therefore, the ad was not a[n] offer.
Was the phone call an offer? Offer defined supra.
Here, Ritzcorp was making an oral offer with definite terms and communicated directly to
Paintco.
-28-
The ad said to submit the offers in writing, but Ritzcorp departed from this. Since the ad
was not an offer, its stated method of acceptance did not have to match the terms [of]
Ritzcorp’s ad.
Therefore, Ritzcorp made a valid offer.
Acceptance:
Acceptance is an assent to the terms of the offer. It can be made in the manner indicated
by the offer, or in any reasonable manner.
Here, Paintco accepted the offer for 8,500 gallons. Their assent was made in the manner
stated in the offer (by May 1 and in writing).
The letter satisfied the writing requirement.
Mailbox rule:
Acceptances are effective on dispatch, if the acceptance was made in the manner required
by the offer.
Here, the acceptance was in writing and dispatched by May 1.
Therefore, the mailbox rule applies and there is a valid acceptance.
Consideration:
Consideration is a legally sufficient bargained-for exchange, inducing current performance,
a detriment to the promissee, and binding on both parties.
Here, the agreement is to exchange paint for money. It [sic] as bargained for, will induce
performance and will be binding. It is a detriment to both parties.
Therefore, there is valid consideration.
DEFENSES:
Statute of frauds:
The statute of frauds requires all contracts for goods of $500 or more to be in writing.
Here, the statute applies, because the paint would cost 8,500 times $10 = $85,000.
Therefore, there can be a possible statute of frauds defense.
-29-
Merchant’s confirmatory memorandum to satisfy the statute of frauds:
A merchant’s confirmatory memorandum can satisfy the statute if it is in writing and would
serve to bind the sender, the recipient has reason to know its contents and the recipient
does not object within 10 days.
Here, the letter from Paintco would be binding on Paintco, Ritz[corp] has reason to know
of its contents because it is in response to their offer and Ritzco[rp] has not objected.
Therefore, the letter will satisfy the statute of frauds and there is a binding contract.
Terms of the contract:
Between merchants, the contract will contain the terms of the offer and will include any new
terms in the acceptance unless:
1. The offer did not allow new or changed terms
2. The new terms are material
3. The terms are objected to within a reasonable time.
Material terms are those that would result in the significant loss of the benefit of the bargain
or result in surprise or hardship.
Here, Paintco accepted for the offer of 8500 gallons at $10.
The new term of “fully warranted” will be new if the warranty was not already implied.
Since a warranty of merchantability is already implied by law, this term is not new and will
not change the deal.
The change of 8500 gallons to 10,000 is material. Even though Paintco wanted 10,000
originally, Ritzco[rp] only offered 8500 and Paintco accepted that.
Therefore, the terms are for 8500 gallons at $10 each and include the normal implied
warranties.
Anticipatory repudiation (AR):
AR occurs when a party unequivocally indicates that it will not perform on the contract.
Here, Ritzco[rp] indicated that it was only prepared to deal at $12 per gallon. This created
doubt as to their intent to perform.
Therefore, Paintco may have grounds to treat that $12 price statement as AR.
-30-
Assurances under the UCC:
When a party indicates that it might not perform under a contract, the other party has
grounds to demand assurances. The assurances can be in any manner generally accepted
in that industry, but must provide a sense of confidence that performance will be
forthcoming.
Here, when Ritzco[rp] said it was only prepared to offer a price of $12, this created doubt
of their intent to perform.
Paintco tried to obtain assurances by “subsequent talks,” which would probably be the first
step in that industry.
Therefore, when they “failed to resolve their differences” Paintco was within its rights to
declare that Ritzco[rp] had repudiated.
Remedy for AR:
When AR occurs, the [o]ther party may consider the contract rescinded as to the executory
part, may sue immediately, may sue on law date or may ignore the AR and urge
performance. The non-repudiating party may sue for breach.
Here, Paintco has chosen to declare breach.
Therefore, Paintco can recover for breach.
Damages for breach:
In the case of breach, the non-breaching party may effect cover in the market and sue for
market differential and indicentals [sic] and consequential damages. This will put the nonbreacher
in the same position as if the contract had not been breached. The nonbreaching
party has a duty to mitigate by avoiding any damages where feasible.
Here, the acceptance was for 8500 gallons at $10. Paintco covered at $14. The additional
costs to Paintco were $4 per gallon X 8500 gallons or $34,000.
There are no apparent consequential damages, since Paintco was able to mitigate by
covering.
Therefore, Paintco can recover $34,000 plus indicentals [sic].
-31-
Question 4
Peter, walking along the street at 10:00 p.m. on April 20, urgently needed to find a
restroom. Just ahead was Dell’s Supper Club (“Dell’s”), which Peter had patronized a few
times in the past. There was a sign on the door of Dell’s that said “Restrooms for Patrons
Only.” He was not familiar with Dell’s restroom. He entered the dimly lit club and was
directed by a waitress toward a door marked “MEN”. Peter opened this door and stepped
into an even darker room. Just inside the door, Peter felt for and pushed a light switch, but
no light came on because the bulb in the ceiling fixture was burned out. Nevertheless,
Peter walked towards what he thought was the toilet, but tripped over a step, fell, and
suffered severe cuts and bruises.
Later that night at Dell’s John ordered a steak with mushrooms. Dell’s used canned
mushrooms purchased from Acme Foods, which three weeks earlier had discovered that
some of its canned mushrooms had been improperly prepared and if eaten could cause
botulism. Acme Foods notified all its customers of the problems with the canned
mushrooms and offered to replace any cans of mushrooms purchased from them. Dell’s
received this notice, but disregarded it. John was served some of the mushrooms in
question and as a result contracted botulism, recovering only after five days of severe
illness and hospital treatment.
At 6:00 a.m. the next morning Carl, who was paid to pick up the garbage at Dell’s, drove
to the back of the club to carry out his duties. He did not see Dell’s large guard dog
chained next to the bin to keep out trespassers, and the dog was asleep when Carl entered
the bin. As Carl walked to the bin, he startled the dog and it attacked Carl. The dog
grabbed Carl’s shoe and held on tightly. Carl managed to get his foot out of the shoe, ran
to the fence surrounding the back of the restaurant, and climbed over it to get away from
the dog. Once he reached the top of the fence, he fell to the ground on the other side and
broke his leg.
What actions could Peter, John and Carl assert against Dell’s, what defenses should Dell’s
assert, and what would be the probable results? Discuss.
-32-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
Negligence
Under tort law negligence is a failure to act as a reasonably prudent person in the same
circumstances. A prima facie case of negligence requires a showing of duty, breach,
proximate and actual causation, and damages.
1. Peter v. Dell’s (P v. D)
A. Negligence
1. Standard of care
Under tort law the standard of care is that of a reasonably prudent person in the same
situation.
Here D is a landowner because P was injured on their property.
Therefore D is held to the standard of care of other landowners.
2. Duty
Under common law there was no general duty to act affirmatively to protect others.
Under Palsgraf, Cordozo argued that D owes a duty only to those in the zone of danger to
protect foreseeable plaintiffs from foreseeable harm.
Andrews argued that if D owes a duty to anyone he owes a duty to everyone.
Here there is a special duty because D is a landowner as discussed above.
The specific level of duty D owes to P depends on the status of P.
A. P as trespasser
Under common law landowners owed no duty to trespassers. Modernly landowners owe
a duty to known trespassers to avoid from actively causing them harm from the landowner’s
use or activities on the land.
Here P may be considered a known trespasser because although he was not going to buy
anything at D’s the waitress knew that he was going into the restroom marked for patrons
only because the waitress directed him there.
-33-
Therefore if P is considered a known trespasser D owed him a duty not to actively cause
him harm from their use or activities on the land.
B. P as licensee
Under tort law landowners owe a duty to licensee, those on the property with permission
but not to convey a benefit to landowner, to warn them of known artificial dangers on their
land.
Here P may be considered a licensee because although he did not intend to buy anything
this time he had visited a few times in the past and as D was a “Supper Club” it may be
reasonable to find that P was licensed to enter D’s land.
Therefore if P is considered a known trespasser D owed him a duty to warn of known
artificial dangers on the land.
3. Breach
Under the Learned Hand Calculus breach can be found where the burden of preventing the
harm to P combined with the social utility of D’s acts are not outweighed by the likelihood
of harm occurring to P times the magnitude of harm which might occur.
Here the burden of preventing the harm to P may have been small if the bulb has been out
for awhile and no one at D’s inspected the restroom periodically.
Here there is no social utility in not checking the restrooms.
Here the likelihood of injury is high because it is reasonable to find that if a lightbulb is burnt
out that someone may hurt themselves in the dark.
Here the magnitude of harm is high because a restroom is a potentially dangerous place
in the dark and someone could fall and hit their head causing serious harm or even death.
Therefore D breached his duty to P.
4. Actual cause
Under tort law actual causation will be found where but/for the negligence of D the plaintiff
would not have been harmed.
Here but/for D’s negligence is [sic] not changing the lightbulb P would not have been
harmed because P would have seen the step and not tripped.
Therefore D is an actual cause of P’s harm.
-34-
5. Proximate cause
Under tort law P’s injury must not have occurred in a way to [sic] unforeseen or removed
from the negligent acts of the defendant.
Here P’s injury was foreseeable because as discussed above P fell because there was no
light and it is reasonably foreseeable that if there is no light in a bathroom someone could
get hurt.
Here there are no intervening acts because although the bulb burnt [sic] out it[‘s] not
unforeseeable, because bulbs burn out all the time.
Therefore D is the proximate cause of P’s harm.
6. Damages
Under tort law victims of negligence must suffer damages in order to be compensated.
Here P suffered damages because he suffered severe cuts and bruises.
Therefore P suffered compensable damages.
B. D’s defenses
1. Contributory negligence
Under tort law contributory negligence is a minority doctrine that any negligence by P acts
as a complete bar to recovery. Even in a contributory negligence jurisdiction P can recover
if D had the “last chance” to prevent the harm to P.
Here there if [sic] contributory negligence because P saw that the light didn’t come on but
went into the restroom anyway.
Here D did not have the last change [sic] to prevent P’s harm because P could have
avoided the harm at the last change [sic] by not entering.
Therefore in a contributory negligence jurisdiction D would have a defense to P’s claim of
negligence.
2. Comparative negligence
Under tort law comparative negligence is a majority doctrine that any negligence by P is
not a bar to recovery but acts to reduce the damages payable by D by the percentage that
P’s own negligence contributed to his own injuries.
-35-
Here as discussed above P was also negligent in entering a dark room.
Therefore in a comparative negligence jurisdiction any award for damages to P would be
reduced by the percent of his own negligence.
3. Assumption of the risk
Under tort law if P knowingly and voluntarily assumes the risk of his own actions it is a
complete bar to recovery.
Here P knew that the room was dark but he did not know that there was a step in the room.
Therefore although he voluntarily entered the room he did not do so with a complete
knowledge of the risk he was assuming and assumption of the risk fails as a defense to D’s
negligence.
2. John v. Dell (J v. D)
A. Strict liability in tort
Under tort law those in the chain of marketing are strictly liable for injuries caused by
defective products.
1. Manufacturing defect
Under tort law a manufacturing defect exists when a product is not produced as designed
and such manufacturing defect causes injury.
Here there is a manufacturing defect because the mushrooms were improperly prepared
and could cause botulism.
a. Consumer expectation test
Under the consumer expectation test a product defect exists if the product fails to function
as a reasonable consumer would expect.
Here there is a failure of the consumer expectation test because a reasonably [sic]
consumer would not expect a mushroom to cause botulism.
2. Proper plaintiff
Under strict liability in torts a duty is owed to foreseeable users and those foreseeably
affected by the defective product.
-36-
Here there is a foreseeable user because it is foreseeable that a restaurant would buy
mushrooms and use them in food they served to their guests.
Therefore J is a foreseeable user.
3. Proper defendant
Under strict liability in torts all those in the chain of marketing a defective product are liable
for the harm caused.
Here D is in the chain of marketing because they sold the mushrooms with the steak they
served to J.
Therefore D is a proper defendant.
4. Actual cause
Supra
Here D is the actual cause of J’s harm because but/for them [sic] serving the mushrooms
J would not have been harmed.
5. Proximate cause
Supra
Here D is the proximate cause of J’s harm because contracting botulism is a foreseeable
result of serving bad mushrooms.
6. Damages
Supra
Here P suffered damages because he got sick and had to go the hospital.
7. Defenses
Here there is no evidence that J was aware of the risk or that he was in any way negligent.
Therefore D has no defense to J’s claim of strict liability.
B. Negligence
The discussion for negligence mirrors the discussion for strict liability in tort with the
exception that negligence requires a showing of breach while strict liability does not.
-37-
1. Breach
Supra
Here the burden of preventing the harm would have been to not disregard the notice they
received warning of the danger.
Here there is no social utility in not reading the notice.
Here the likelihood of harm is high because Acme told them it was.
Here the magnitude of potential harm is high because botulism is a serious illness requiring
hospitalization.
Therefore D breached their duty to J and is liable for negligence.
C. Warranty
Under tort law all products carry with them an implied warranty of merchantability that they
are fit for their intended use.
Here mushrooms are intended to be used as food.
Here the mushrooms were not fit for use as food because they caused botulism.
Therefore D breached the implied warranty of merchantability.
3. Carl v. Dell (C v. D)
A. Strict liability
Under tort law defendants are strictly liable for harm caused by wild animals or domestic
animals who are known to be dangerous.
Here there is an animal known to be dangerous because it is reasonable to find that a large
guard dog kept chained in a fence to keep out trespassers would be a danger to anyone
he encountered.
Therefore D is strictly liable to C for the damage done by the guard dog.
B. Actual cause
Supra
Here but/for the guard dog C would not have climbed the fence and fell, breaking his leg.
-38-
Therefore D is an actual cause of C’s harm.
C. Proximate cause
Supra
Here it is not unforeseeable that if a dangerous dog attacked someone they would try to
get away and get injured in the attempt.
Therefore D is the proximate cause of C’s harm.
D. Damages
Supra
Here C is injured because he broke his leg.
Therefore C suffered compensable injuries.
E. Defenses
Here there is no evidence that C was aware of the risk because he did not see the dog and
it was asleep when he entered the bin. There is also no evidence that C was in any way
negligent.
Therefore D has no defense to C’s claim of strict liability.
2. Negligence
Here as discussed above D can be found to be negligent in regards to C if it is found that
he owed a duty and breached that duty to C.
A. Duty
Supra
Landowners owe a duty to invitees to warn of hidden dangers on the property.
Here C can be found to be an invitee because he was on the property to incur a benefit to
D, the removal of the garbage.
B. Breach
Supra
-39-
Here D breached the duty to C because they did not warn of the dangerous dog on the
property.
C. Actual cause
Supra
D. Proximate cause
Supra
E. Damages
Supra
F. Defenses
Supra
-40-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
1. Peter v. Dell’s
Peter may be able to recover damages against Dell’s for his injuries if he is able to prove
the elements of negligence. In order to prevail in a negligence suit, Peter would have to
show that Dell’s had a duty of care to him which they breached, causing him damages.
Duty: A person ordinarily owes a duty of care to control their own conduct to prevent injury
to other people that may result from the things they do. The duty owed may be based on
statute, contract, relationship, admission of the duty, or creation of the peril. In this case,
duty based on relationship is the important factor.
Here, the relationship between Peter and Dell’s is important. Peter has gone onto the
property of Dell’s to use the restroom, even though Dell’s has posted signs that indicate the
restrooms are for customers only. Dell’s may want to consider Peter a trespasser, and thus
owed no duty. However, it is reasonably foreseeable that persons may come in off the
street to use the facilities; if this were not so, then Dell’s would not have posted the sign
restricting access to their customers only. Peter is still not a licensee or invitee in this case,
but because his trespass is either expected or common, Dell’s owes a duty of care to him
to warn of artificial hazards and to correct those that can be reasonably fixed.
Therefore, Dell’s owes a duty of care to Peter.
Breach: A person has breached their duty of care when their conduct does not rise to the
level required to protect others.
Here, Dell’s could have replaced the bulbs making the bathroom area so very dark. Under
the Hand analysis, if the burden of the precaution is less than the magnitude of the injury
times its probability, then a breach has occurred. The burden of replacing a light bulb is
small, as is the placing of a sign or notice that there are steps ahead. On the other side of
the equation, the probability that someone will trip on the steps in the dark is great, and the
magnitude of the possible injury is also great.
Therefore, Dell’s has breached its duty of care to Peter.
Causation: In order to be liable, the defendant’s conduct must be both the actual and
proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury.
Actual cause is found when the defendant’s conduct is the but-for cause of the injury, or
in some cases a substantial factor in the injury.
Here, since the burned out light and lack of warning led directly to Peter’s injury, Dell’s
breach of duty if [sic] the actual cause of the harm.
-41-
Proximate cause is found when there are no superseding, intervening events.
Here, there are no events intervening between Peter’s entry into the restroom area and his
accident due to the lack of lighting and signs.
Therefore, Dell’s breach of its duty will be found to be the actual and proximate cause of
Peter’s injury.
Damages: In order to prevail, the plaintiff must show damages.
Here, the facts state that Peter suffered severe cuts and bruises from his fall.
Defenses: Dell’s may have some defenses to this action. Defenses include contributory
negligence (if the jurisdiction follows contributory negligence), comparative negligence, and
assumption of the risk. In contributory negligence, if the plaintiff has any fault in the injury
he suffered, then he is barred from recovery. In a comparative negligence jurisdiction, the
plaintiff may recover according to the degree of fault assigned to the parties. In pure
comparative negligence, he will recover his portion of damages, regardless of how small
or large it may be. In modified comparative negligence jurisdictions, he will recover if his
fault is 50% or less of the total fault. Under assumption of the risk, Peter would be barred
from recovery if it was found that he knew of the risk and voluntarily engaged in the conduct
anyway.
In this case, Dell’s may assert that by walking into a dark, unfamiliar room, Peter
contributed to his own injury. This would create a degree of fault for Peter. There may be
some contributory or comparative negligence found here. Since Peter was unaware that
there were steps that could harm him, assumption of the risk would not apply here.
Result: In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, Peter would be barred from recovery
based on walking into a dark unfamiliar room. In a comparative negligence jurisdiction, he
would recover according to the degree of fault he was assigned by the court.
2. John v. Dell’s
John may have a cause of action against Dell’s under strict liability in tort if he can show
that he is a proper party, that the product was defective, that the product caused him harm,
and he suffered damages.
Parties? Proper parties to a suit such as this must be foreseeable users of the product.
In this case, John was a patron of a restaurant serving canned mushrooms which were
defective and made him ill. A restaurant customer is a foreseeable user of food supplied
to that restaurant.
Therefore, John is a proper party to sue in strict liability.
-42-
Defective product? The product must be shown to be defective either in design,
manufacture, or warnings.
Here, the product was produced improperly and could cause botulism. The factory
promptly notified its customers of the problem and offered to replace the mushrooms.
Clearly they knew that the product was defective. The question is whether Dell’s knew of
the defect. The facts state that Dell’s received the notice but disregarded it.
Therefore, the product is clearly defective in manufacture, and the parties involved were
aware of the defect.
Was Dell’s conduct the actual and proximate cause of John’s harm? As discussed
above, Dell’s conduct must be shown to be both actual and proximate cause of the harm
to John.
Here, Dell’s knew of the potential for botulism poisoning from the mushrooms, because
they were warned of the possibility, but they chose to ignore the warning and serve the
mushrooms anyway. This conduct clearly cause [sic] the mushrooms to be served to John,
causing him illness. There were no other intervening or possible sources of the harm to
John.
Therefore, Dell’s conduct in serving the mushrooms is the actual and proximate cause of
John’s injury.
Damages? John must show that he suffered some harm due to the actions of Dell’s.
Here, the facts state that John suffered five days of illness and hospital treatments.
Therefore, John suffered damages from Dell’s conduct in serving the mushrooms.
Defenses? In strict liability in tort, there are no provisions for contributory negligence.
Dell’s would only be able to try to claim that either John knew there was a risk of poisoned
mushrooms and ate them anyway, or that he was somehow at fault in eating them. Neither
possibility seems likely.
Conclusion: Dell’s will be found liable in strict liability in tort for the illness and damages
John suffered due to eating the mushrooms.
3. Carl v. Dell’s
Carl may be able to recover damages from Dell’s in strict liability due to his injuries from
Dell’s guard dog if he can show that Dell’s knew that the dog had dangerous or vicious
propensities to harm people. He would also have to show causation and harm in order to
collect.
-43-
A person may be held strictly liable for the actions of domestic animals if the animal has a
propensity to be vicious. If the dog has bitten before, or been trained to be vicious, then
the owner is strictly liable without fault for any damage the dog may do to others.
Here, the facts do not state if Dell’s dog has actually ever bitten anyone. However, the
facts do state that he is a guard dog, that it is chained up to keep trespassers out, and that
[it] is kept in back near the trash bins. All these factors would seem to indicate that the dog
is expected to be quite fierce and protective of the property, and may indeed demonstrate
a degree of viciousness.
Therefore, by having such an animal, even chained up, Dell assumes the liability of any
injuries the dog may inflict.
Causation? Discussed above. Actual and proximate cause required.
Here, the threat of the dog caused Carl to climb the fence from which he fell and broke his
leg. The dog was the actual cause of the injury. In addition, Dell’s fence was obviously
high enough that falling from it, escaping from the dog, was sufficient to cause harm.
Therefore, Dell’s is the actual and proximate cause of Carl’s injury.
Damages? Carl must show actual injury.
Here, the dog only damaged Carl’s shoe. However, in the effort to escape from the dog,
Carl climbed a fence, falling and breaking his leg. The shoe is only minor damage, but the
broken leg is much more serious.
Therefore, Carl’s damages including his damaged shoe and broken leg will be found to be
injuries caused by the dog threat.
Defenses?
There are none.
Result?
Dell’s is liable for Carl’s damages.









California
First-Year
Law Students’
Examination
Essay Questions
and
Selected Answers
June 2004
-i-
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2004 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS’ EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2004 California First Year Law
Students’ Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the
examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in
spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here
with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the
essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number Subject Page
1. Torts 1
2. Contracts 11
3. Criminal Law 21
4. Torts 36
-ii-
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the
difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and
fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand
the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their
relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason
in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not
merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your
proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit.
State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal
doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general
application.
-1-
Question 1
Penelope and her friends went shopping at Deals Department Stores (“Deals”). They
entered Deals on the first floor and decided to take the elevator to the third floor. Penelope
pressed the button for the elevator. While waiting for it to arrive, Penelope chatted with her
friends with her back to the elevator door. When she heard the elevator door open,
Penelope, without looking, stepped backward into the elevator opening while continuing to
chat with her friends. No elevator car was present, she fell into the shaft, and dropped
fifteen feet to the basement floor.
While Penelope suffered only minor physical injuries as a result of her fall, shortly thereafter
she suffered an acute psychotic breakdown from which she has not recovered. Penelope’s
doctors have concluded that the elevator accident aggravated a pre-existing psychological
condition which has caused permanent disabilities.
Deals owns the store building and contracts with Reliable Elevator Company (“Reliable”)
to maintain the elevator. Reliable also manufactured and installed the elevator. This type
of accident involving a Reliable elevator has never happened before and there is no
evidence of what caused the elevator car to be out of position when the elevator door
opened.
1. Under what theory or theories should Penelope bring an action for recovery of damages
for her injuries, and against whom? Discuss.
2. What defenses should be raised and what are the likely results? Discuss.
-2-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
â TORTS
Penelope v. Deals Department Stores [“Deals”]
Negligence:
Negligence is a breach of a legal duty that actually and proximately causes damages
to another.
Duty:
A duty is what a reasonable prudent person would be required to do or not do under
the same or similar circumstances.
Landowners owe no duty to trespassers but do owe a duty of care to persons they
invite onto their land.
Invitee:
An invitee is a person invited onto the landowner[‘]s premises for monetary
exchange type of business tran[s]actions. A landowner owes the duty to inspect the
premises for hidden defects that may pose a danger to the invitee and also owes a duty to
repair any defects on the property.
The facts indicate that Penelope and her friends went shopping at Deals. This is a
business exchange and therefore she is an invitee. Deal[s] owes her a duty of care as
mentioned above.
Breach:
A breach is the failure to perform a legal duty.
Res Ipsa Loquitor
“The thing speaks for itself.” When an elevator door opens without the elevator
present, it can be said that something went wrong and a breach occurred. The elevator
was within Deals[‘] ability to fix and when this accident occurred the court can imply that he
failed to inspect the elevator properly and place the burden on him to prove otherwise.
Deal[s] has breached his duty of care.
Causation:
-3-
Actual Causation:
This is the sine qua non or - “but for” cause of the accident. “But for” the elevator not
being properly maintained, this accident would have never occurred.
Proximate Causation:
This is the direct or indirect act that caused the accident. Penelope will argue that
her injury was a direct result from Deals’ breach. She’ll claim that there were not any
intervening, unforeseeable or independent acts.
Deals will argue that Penelope’s not looking as she entered was an intervening act
since it occurred after his breach and was unforeseeable.
Deals[‘] act “set the stage” for the accident and was therefore an indirect proximate
cause. Penelope’s not looking is foreseeable since a blind person shopping at Deals was
foreseeable as falling as well.
Deals’ breach was an actual and proximate cause of Penelope’s injuries.
Damages:
For negligence, economic loss alone is not sufficient. One must suffer physical
damages.
The facts indicated that Penelope sustained “minor physical injuries as a result of
her fall.” These are sufficient damages.
Result:
Deal[s] was negligent and will be liable for general and special damages for
Penelope[‘]s injuries as a result of the fall.
Aggrivated [sic] injuries: thin-skin Plaintiff.
The courts have established that the defendant is liable for even unforeseeable
injuries that result due to the plaintiff’s pre-existing weaknesses. Deal[s] will be liable for
the acute psychotic breakdown that caused her permanent disabilities; even though it was
unforeseeable and unpredictable at the time of the accident. Penelope can recover general
and special damages for her physical disabilities that resulted due to Deals’ negligence.
Penelope v. Reliable Elevator Co. “Reliable”
Products Liability - Negligence
-4-
Duty: Manufacturers of products owe a duty of care to provide safe products.
Under common law, Penelope would not be in privity of contract and not have the
ability to sue Reliable.
However, modernly, MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co. established that manufacturers
owe a duty of care to the purchaser and any foreseeable end user.
The facts indicate that Reliable “manufactured and installed the elevator.” Since
they installed and even maintained it inside Deals Department Store, they were directly put
on notice that any of Deals’ employees or customers were foreseeable users of the
product. Penelope as a customer thus has a cause of action since she is owed a duty of
care.
Breach:
Res Ipsa Loquitor (supra)
Since Reliable was to maintain the product and it failed to operate correctly, a
presumption of a breach can be made. Reliable has breached its duty to Penelope.
Causation: (supra)
Actual cause can be shown since “but for” it not being properly maintained and
inspected, the injury would not have occurred.
Proximate cause can be shown since there was no unforeseeable, intervening or
independent act that broke the chain of causation.
Damages: (supra)
Penelope has suffered minor physical injuries and a permanent disability.
Reliable will be liable for general and special damages for both due to their
negligence.
Due to this not being a newly manufactured good strict liability & warrantee [sic] do
not apply since any maintenance to the machine would be an alteration of modification of
the product.
ã DEFENSES
Penelope v. Deal & Penelope v. Reliable
-5-
Contributory Negligence:
Reliable and Deal[s] will argue that by Penelope stepping backwards into the
elevator shaft without looking was her contributory negligence that should eliminate or
reduce his [sic] liability.
Under common law, a person had to be 100% not negligent to collect. A person’s
even 1% contributory negligence barred them from any recovery.
Some courts offer “Last Clear Chance” for plaintiffs to eliminate there [sic]
contributory negligence. But here, Penelope is not blind and she had the “Last Clear
Chance” to avoid her injury simply by looking where she was going.
Under common law, Penelope would not collect for her injuries form Reliable or
Deal[s].
Modernly, courts follow comparative negligence. In strict comparative negligence,
Penelope can recover 1% of her damage even if 99% at fault. In other juri[s]dictions, they
require that the plaintiff be no greater at fault[,] either 50-50% or 49-51%. Under these
jurisdictions, Penelope can collect whatever portion she was not a[t] fault for.
Assumptions of the Risk.
Plaintiff must know and recognize the danger and proceed anyhow.
Here, Penelope’s back was turned. It can be assumed that she wouldn’t have
stepped if she had seen the empty elevator shaft.
Penelope did not assume the risk.
Deal[s] v. Reliable
Deal[s] may attempt to sue Reliable for indemnity.
Deal[s] will claim that since he contracted with Reliable to maintain the elevator that
they were responsible to maintain it properly.
Deal[s] will state that he is not responsible as respondeat superior for Reliable since
he is not their employer. They can maintain it when they want and can send whatever
repairman they want. Thus, they are independent contractors.
Unless Reliable has an indemnity clause in their service contract, Deal[s] can sue
them and collect for whatever amount that he had to pay Penelope.
-7-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
Penelope vs. Deals
Negligence
Penelope will bring an action for negligence against Deals.
Duty - Deals owes a duty to Penelope as a landowner occupier. Deals[’] duty is to inspect,
warn or make safe any dangerous conditions. This duty is imposed on Deals at this
standard because Penelope is considered an invitee. An invitee is one who has consent
to enter the landowners[’] property and has a pecuniary interest in common with the owner.
Breach - A breach of the duty occurs when the defendant’s actions fall below the standard
of care owed.
Here the facts tell us that the elevator doors opened without the elevator being
present. The defendant[’s] failure to inspect the elevator and make it safe breached his
duty to Penelope.
Deals could have had ensured by inspecting and placing warning signs to always
look before stepping into the elevator.
Causation
The defendant will be liable for an injury if he was both the actual and proximate cause of
the injury.
Actual Cause - This test is usually referred to as the “but for” test. It can be said that but
for Deals[’] failure to inspect or make their premises safe, the injury would not have
occurred.
Proximate Cause - This test is usually referred to as the foreseeability test. It is
foreseeable that an elevator may[,] for whatever reason, not to [sic] be in position.
Deals will counter that Penelope’s act of not looking, before she stepped backwards,
is an independent, unforeseeable, intervening act, but this arguement [sic] will fail, because
it is foreseeable that a customer will be talking with friends and upon hearing the door open
step in without looking.
Deals is therefore the proximate cause of the injuries.
Damages - The plaintiff must actually suffer damages to recover for negligence. This does
not appear to be an issue, because the facts tell us she was injured.
Contributory Negligence - As stated as a defense to proximate causation Deals will counter
-8-
that when Penelope didn’t look, before stepping, she contributed to her injury. If this is
found to be true she will be barred under a contributory jurisdiction from recovery. A
comparative jurisdiction will allow her to recover, with an offset due to [t]he percentage at
fault, under a pure[-]comparative. Under a partial comparative, she may recover if she
wasn’t found more than 50% at fault.
As stated prior this arguement [sic] will fail and Deals will be liable for negligence.
It should be noted that Deals may be able to obtain indemnity from Reliable. If one does
not find negligence as stated supra, res ipsa loquitor discussed infra can be applied here.
Negligent Infliction of Emotional Distress
The defendant can recover under this theory if she was within the zone of danger,
and suffered severe emotional distress.
Since she actually suffered injury due to the negligence, she was in the zone of
danger. Also, the facts tell us, she suffered [an] acute psychotic breakdown that is
permanent, which will satisfy the element of severe emotional distress and the impact
requirement of some jurisdictions.
Deals will counter that he should not be liable because the plaintiff already had a
preexisting condition, but this will fail, because you take your plaintiffs as you find them.
His attempt to break causation will fail, because he was the actual and proximate as
discussed supra.
Deal[s] liable for negligent infliction.
Penelope vs. Reliable
Penelope will sue Reliable under a products liability theory.
A manufacturer can be held liable under negligence, warranty and strict liability if
their product was defective and caused the injury.
Negligence
A manufacturer is held liable for any injury caused to a foreseeable end user or
bystander, due to his negligent design, manufacturing or failure to provid[e] adequate
warning.
The case of MacPherson vs. Buick no longer requires privity.
Res Ipsa Loquitor
-9-
The facts tell us that this type of accident has never occurred and that there is no evidence
of what caused the elevator to be out of position.
When there is no evidence to support a negligent act, res ipsa loquitor is used.
âThe accident must be of the kind that does not normally occur absent negligence. Here
an elevator doesn’t fail to reach it’s [sic] destination absent some negligence.
ãAlso, the cause of the injury must be in the exclusive control of the defendant. Here
Reliable was not only the manufacturer, but also responsible for maintaining the product.
It will therefore be deemed to have been in his exclusive control.
Reliable may counter that he was not in exclusive control, because Deals would also
be in control. This arguement [sic] will fail because, as stated, Reliable was responsible
for maintaining also.
äThe final element is that the plaintiff did not cause or contribute to the injury. Although
Reliable will state that Penelope did cause and contribute to the injury, as discussed in P
v. Deals, this arguement [sic] will fail.
Therefore Reliable will be found liable, under res ipsa, but it should be noted that this
is just an inference of negligence, to be decided by a jury.
Warranty
A manufacturer’s products come with a warranty of merchantability that they will be
safe when used for ordinary purposes. Under Henningson vs. Bloomfield, no privity is
required.
Here the facts tell us the elevator failed to appear when the door opened. An
elevator is suppose[d] to be there, therefore it failed to meet it’s [sic] ordinary purpose.
Since it did not appear as discussed infra it was the actual and proximate cause and
damages resulted.
Strict Liability
A manufacturer is held strictly liable for any injuries caused to any foreseeable end
user or bystander, as a result of a defective product.
Under Elmore vs. American Motors no privity is required.
There are no facts to indicate that there was a design, manufacturing or warning
defect.
-11-
Question 2
GrainCo, a regional grain distributor, sent an offer to sell ten railroad cars of wheat to
Processor. The entire offer is contained on a signed form. The front side of the form
contains GrainCo’s name and address, along with blank spaces for the description of the
goods, quantity, price, and delivery date. The blanks were filled in with the desired
information. The following statement appears at the bottom of the front side of the form:
“Any contract resulting from acceptance of this offer shall consist only of
those terms appearing on the front and reverse sides of this document.”
The reverse side of GrainCo’s form has six paragraphs. Paragraph five reads as follows:
“Any disputes arising under this agreement shall be resolved through binding
arbitration under the rules of the Commercial Arbitration Association.”
Processor responded to GrainCo’s offer with its standard acceptance form. Processor’s
form contains its name, address, and company logo embossed at the top of the page with
the words “Purchase Order” just below. It has blank spaces for the description of the
goods, quantity, price, and delivery date, which Processor filled in with information
matching the information on GrainCo’s offer. Processor’s Purchase Order form has five
paragraphs on the back. Paragraph five states:
“The laws of the State of California shall govern this agreement and any
claims or controversies arising during performance shall be resolved through
proceedings in the courts of the State of California.”
Processor’s Purchase Order form has a signature line at the bottom of the front side, but
due to a clerical error the form sent to GrainCo was not signed. Soon after receiving
Processor’s Purchase Order form, GrainCo purchased ten railroad cars of wheat from local
suppliers for shipment to Processor.
1. Assume that before any wheat is shipped to Processor, the price of wheat falls sharply.
If Processor informs GrainCo that it will not accept the ten railroad cars of wheat, will
Processor be liable to GrainCo for breach of contract? Discuss.
2. Assume instead that GrainCo delivers the ten railroad cars of wheat to Processor, and
Processor pays to GrainCo the full contract price. If Processor has a complaint about the
quality of the wheat it received, must Processor submit its claim to the Commercial
Arbitration Association? Discuss.
-12-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
2)
GrainCo v. Processor
UCC governs
Under contract law, the UCC governs the sale of goods, moveable property identified at
contract formation. Here, the contract was for the sale of ten railroad cars of wheat and
therefore the contract was for the sale of goods and the UCC applies.
Merchants
Under the UCC, a merchant is one who trades in or otherwise holds himself out as
knowledgeable about the goods. Here, GrainCo is a regional grain distributor, and
Processor processing the goods. Therefore, both parties are merchants.
Writing required
Under the Statute of Frauds, a writing is required for the sale of goods over $500. Here,
if the sale of 10 railroad cars of grain exceeds $500, a writing is required.
Formation
Under contract law, the rights and remedies of the parties depend on whether a valid
contract has been formed. A valid contract consists of mutual assent (offer and
acceptance) and consideration.
Offer
An offer is a[n] outward manifestation of a present intent to be contractually bound, creating
a power of acceptance in the offeree, and containing certain and definite terms. Here[,]
GrainCo sent a written offer and the entire agreement was contained on a signed form.
Therefore, the form was an outward manifestation with intend[sic] to be bound creating a
power of acceptance in the offeree which did in fact create a power of acceptance in the
offeree.
At common law, the offer had to contain quantity, time for performance, parties, price, and
subject matter. Modernly under the UCC, quantity is sufficient[;] all other terms can be
ascertained by course of dealings, course of performance, trade usage or gap fillers. Here,
the offer contained goods, quantity, price and delivery date. Since quantity is sufficient, we
have certain and definite terms.
Acceptance
-13-
Acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. At common law, the
acceptance had to be the mirror image of the offer. Under UCC 2-201, additional or
different terms may be included unless the offeror expressly limits the contract to the terms
in the offer, the offeree objects within 10 days, or the acceptance alters a material term.
Here, the offer stated that ”any contract resulting from acceptance...shall consist only of
those terms appearing on the front and reverse sides of this document”. Under the UCC,
and since the parties are both merchants, this state expressly limits the terms to the terms
of the offeror and hence GrainCo’s arbitration clause would prevail. Without the terms
clause, any terms that are not the same as the original offer would be knocked out.
Processor’s acceptance was printed on a standard form and mirrored GrainCo’s offer with
the exception that Processor’s Purchase order also had a controversies paragraph on the
back stating that “The law of the State of California shall govern this agreement and any
claims or controversies arising during performance shall be resolved through proceedings
in the courts of the State of California”. Processor’s different terms regarding disputes will
not become part of the contract since the offeror expressly limited the contract to offeror’s
terms.
Consideration
Consideration is that which is bargained for and given in exchange for a current exchange.
It can be an act, forbearance to act, or return promise resulting in legal benefit or legal
detriment. Here, GrainCo’s receiving the grain is his legal detriment and Processor
receiving the grain is Processor’s legal benefit. GrainCo’s receipt of money for the grain
is his legal benefit and Processor’s promise to pay for the grain is Processor’s legal
detriment. Therefore, we have a valid consideration and a valid contract.
Statute of Frauds Defense
Statute of frauds requires a writing for a contract for the sale of goods for $500 or more.
The facts don’t state a specific amount. Here, if the contract was for less than $500, no
writing is required. Assuming the contract was for more than $500, then a writing is
required. Under the UCC, a writing requires a signing by the party to be charged and
quantity. Processor’s acceptance form included a quantity term but due to a clerical error
did not contain a signature. The form[,] however, did contain its name, address and
company logo on the top of the page with the words “Purchase Order”. Courts have held
that this is sufficient since it can be implied that there was a meeting of the minds and an
acceptance by Processor since their Purchase Order contained the name of the party to
be charge [sic], Processor filled out the form and sent it. Additionally, since the lack of
signature was a clerical error, courts will tend to allow reformation for a unilateral mistake
on behalf of the non-mistaking party. Here, processor’s mistake to not sign the form was
unilateral so the courts will tend to enforce the contract against the non-mistaking party
which is GrainCo. Therefore, the Statue [sic] of Frauds will be no defense and the contract
will be enforceable.
-14-
If the courts were to allow the status [sic] of frauds as a defense, GrainCo could collect
damages from Processor since GrainCo detrimentally relied on Processor’s acceptance
and purchased 10 carloads of wheat.
Anticipatory repudiation (Question 1)
Anticipatory repudiation occurs when a party communicates that they unequivocally will not
perform. Here, the price of wheat fell and Processor informed GrainCo that it would not
accept the ten railroad cars of wheat. Under the UCC, the terms of a contract can be
modified in for [sic] a good faith reason. Here, both parties assumed the risk of the price
of wheat fluctuating. An increase of price is no defense to contract formation. Both parties
are merchants and deal in the product and know or should know that there is a probability
of price fluctuations. When Processor stated that is[sic] would not accept the wheat,
GrainCo has the right to immediately stop performance, mitigate his damages and try to
sell the wheat to another party, and sue Processor because Processor has breached his
absolute duty. Processor may assert the Statute of Frauds Defense (supra), but will not
prevail.
Performance (Question 2)
Under the UCC, a buyer that receives nonconforming goods may reject the shipment, or
accept the shipment and collect damages for the difference between the goods if they had
been of the quality specified by the contract minus the price of the goods as accepted. A
writing[,] however, can specify terms different from the UCC. Here, GrainCo had an
arbitration clause that required disputes to be settled through the rules of the Commercial
Arbitration Association (see Offer supra). Processor’s form indicated resolution through the
courts of California. Since GrainCo’s form expressly limited the contract to the terms in the
original offer[,] Processor must submit its claim to the Commercial Arbitration Associations.
Breach
Failure to perform a duty that has become absolute through satisfaction, excuse or
discharge. Here, Processor’s duty became absolute upon offer, acceptance and
consideration absent any defenses. When Processor antipatorily [sic] repudiated the
contract, he breached his duty and is liable to GrainCo for damages consisting of the cost
of the contract minus any monies GrainCo would receive from mitigating.
-15-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
Grainco v. Processor
Which law governs?
The sale of goods are governed by Uniform Commercial Code. Here the subject matter
is wheat[,] which is a tangible item. Hence UCC will be governing law.
Are Parties Merchants?
Merchants are parties who are regularly engaged in the dealing of a good or who hold
themselves out as having special knowledge in the subject matter of the contract.
It appears from the fact that Grainco and Processor are in regular business of dealing in
wheat and as such will be considered merchants.
Is there a contract?
In order to find a legally enforceable agreement, there should be certain elements present[:]
namely, a valid offer, a valid and timely acceptance and consideration. We will discuss
these items one by one as follows:
Offer:
An offer is an outward manifestation of the desire of a party to enter into a
contractual relationship. An offer should have three components[,] i.e.
Intent - The party making an offer should demonstrate an intent to enter into a
present contractual relationship in such a way that the person to whom such offer is made
should reasonably understand that power of acceptance has been bestowed upon them.
Content - The offer should contain essential items of the offer[:] namely
identification of the parties, price, subject matter and time of performance.
Communication - Such intent and contents should be clearly communicated to the
offeree so as to make a reasonable person understand that an offer has been extended
giving him power of acceptance.
In the instant case, we are told that Grainco sent a written offer to sell ten carloads
of wheat to Processor. This offer was written on a signed form which identified parties,
subject matter quantity, price and delivery date. It clearly communicated an intent to
commit should such offer be retur[n]ed with due acceptance by Processor.
Hence we can conclude that there was a valid offer made.
-16-
Acceptance:
Acceptance is the clear and unequivocal assent to each and every term of the offer,
given by the offeree in the manner & time prescribed by the offer or in absence of such
stipulations conveyed in a reasonable manner within a reasonable time or until the offer
does not lapse or is not revoked.
Here we see that Processor returned Grainco’s offer with their acceptance using
their standard acceptance form. The offer had not been revoked up to the time they
accepted. The acceptance identified the parties, the price, the subject matter and also
stated the terms.
Hence we can conclude that their [sic] was a timely acceptance.
Additiona[l]/Conflicting Terms:
Since the governing law is UCC, “Mirror Image Rule” of common law is not
applicable.
UCC allows acceptance in any reasonable form with any additional terms not being
fatal to contract formation as long as those additional terms do not fall in one of the
following categories:
1. Materially change the contract
2. Make the formation entirely contingent upon the acceptance of the terms of the
acceptance
3. Are objected to by the offeror within reaso[n]able time.
Under the UCC, additional terms which do not materially alter the terms of the offere
[sic] become part of the contract if not objected to by the offeror. However, the terms which
materially alter the terms of the contract are to be expressly consented to by the offeror in
order to become part of the contract.
UCC handles conflicting terms in the following manner:
Knock Out Rule: Conflicting terms are self[-]cancelling and the contract is
reduced to the terms which are not conflicting each other.
UCC Gap fillers: UCC provide gab [sic] fillers which will replace the
conflicting terms with the standard terms provided by UCC.
In the instant case, we see that GrianCo [sic] had made it a condition that the
acceptance will be only on the terms printed on their offer/sale form. Paintco’s form,
-17-
though[,] contained a conflicting terms [sic] concerning issues of dispute which may arise
later on, did not stipulate that the formation of contract will be conditional on acceptance
of their terms.
However, since there is conflict, a court may find the conflicting terms self[-]cancelling and
may insert standard UCC gap fillers.
Consideration:
Consideration is defined as bargained for exchange of legal detriment. In [sic] can
be in two forms:
1. Promise by each party to do what they were not obligated to do absent the
contract.
2. Forbearance to act which they were entitled to act absent the contract.
Here, we see that GrainCo has agreed to supply grain and Processor has agreed
to pay the money.
Hence proper consideration is available and is not fatal to contract formation.
Absence of Signature:
The formation of contract is dependent on valid Offer, Acceptance & Consideration
as well as parties[‘] intent to enter into the contract.
Absence of signature will not be fatal to the formation of the contract as long as
parties desired to enter into the contract and met the essential elemental requirement to
form the contract.
Statutes of Fraud:
Concerning sale of goods contract, if the value of goods is over $500.00, such
contract is required to be in writing.
Here we see that parties made the offer and acceptance in writing on their standard
stationery. Such stationery clearly identified the parties involved, subject matter of the
contract, price, date and place of delivery[,] etc.
Hence we may conclude that the SOF requirement was met.
Anticipatory Repudiation:
While the contract is executory on both sides, i.e.[,] neither party has rendered
-18-
performance under the contract, anticipatory repudiation is said to have occurred if one of
the parties, unequivocally and clearly express intention that they will not perform their
duties, the aggrieve[d] party is faced with anticipatory repudiation.
Here we see that GrainCo has not yet shipped when Processor notified G that they
will not pay for the grain. This refusal to pay was due to the changed market conditions.
Since G has not yet performed, i.e.[,] they have not yet shipped the grain, we may conclude
that the contract is still executory on both sides. Hence, G is not faced with AR from P.
UCC offers following options to the party faced with AR:
1. Consider this a present breach and sue immediately.
2. Wait for the due date and sue if performance not rendered when due.
3. Disregard AR and demand assurances.
G has an option to consider P in breach and sue for damages immediately. His
obligations under the contract will be immediately discharged.
Is there a Breach:
Breach occurs when the performance is not rendered when due.
Here, we are faced with the situation of AR per discussion above. If G elects that
they will considered [sic] AR as breach, P will be found to have breached his duties.
We are faced with the breach of contract by P.
Defenses by P:
P may try to raise following defenses:
No Contract Formed:
P may try to establish that there was no contract formed because of the
following:
1. Purchase Order not signed -
P may argue that since the purchase order required signature and was not signed,
there was no contract formed.
This argument will not hold since it was P who failed to singed [sic] and cannot claim
the benefit of his own mistake. Moreover, it was clear from P’s actions that they had
accepted G’s offer when P filled out their standard form with what they were offered on
G’[s] offer form. Courts look at the intent of the parties. Here the SOF requirements were
met and parties clearly intended to enter into a contract.
-19-
This defense will fail.
2. Conflicting Terms:
P may argue that due to conflicting terms in the purchase and sale order, no contract
was formed.
Under UCC additional terms do become part of the contract unless they materially
change the contract. Such conflicting terms may either be accepted by the offeror and
become part of the contract or they may self[-]cancel each other and UCC’s standard gap
fillers come into play.
This defense will also fail.
3. Impracticability:
P may argue that due to market fluctuation, it is commercially unconscionable to hold
him to the agreement he made. It will be commercially fatal for him to purchase the grain
at such a high price.
Equitable Estoppel: The courts may use the doctrine of equitable estoppel, where
it can be shown that P’s acceptance was foreseeable to cause justified reliance by G and
it would render G impoveris[h]ed due to the steps he took to fulfil his contractual duties.
We are told that as soon as G received P acceptance form, G purchased the grains.
If P now refuses to accept and pay for them, G will be unjustly impoverished and the court
may find that the only way injustice can be avoided would be to hold P for the promise he
made.
The court may find P in breach and will allow recovery to G.
What can be recovered:
In cases of breach, following interests can be recovered;
Expectation Damages:
Where both parties have not performed, the aggrieved party may be able to recover the
benefit of the bargain and may be put in the situation as if the contract would have been
carried out.
Here G may be able [to] recover the contract price minus what they save by not having to
perform.
-20-
Reliance Damages:
Where aggrieved party has partly performed and the other party breached, they may be
able to recover the expense incurred and losses sustained by letting other opportunities
pass by.
Here G may be able to recove[r] the expenses they incurred and any lost sales due to
commitment from P.
Restitution Damages:
It is applicable where agrieved party has fully performed and the other party breaches.
The aggrieved party may be able to recover the full value of his performance not limited by
the cost.
Since here, G had not performed when P repudiated, restitution damage will not be
applicable.
Processor v. Grainco
Additional or Contradictory Terms:
Please see discussion concerning UCC rules on additional or contradictory terms in the
offer v. acceptance supra.
In the instant case, we know that G had made it clear that conditions stated on their forms
will govern. P sent their own acceptance form which contained contradictory term. From
the facts given to us, we see that G never expressly consented to the additional or
conflicting term.
A court may rule in following manner:
1. It may consider that the additional or contradictory term did not become part of
the contract since it was never expressly consented to. In that case P will have to submit
to Commercial Arbitration Association.
2. The court may consider both terms self[-]cancelling and will apply UCC Provision.
In that case UCC provision will hold and P may not be bound by the provision in G’s form.
-21-
Question 3
After drinking heavily, Art and Ben decided that they would rob the local all-night
convenience store. They drove Art’s truck to the store, entered, and yelled, “This is a stickup,”
while brandishing their unloaded pistols. They discovered that the only persons in the
store were Mark, who worked at the store, and Fran, a customer. Art became enraged,
since he regarded Fran as his steady girlfriend and was jealous that she had been
spending time with Mark. Art announced, “We’ll chill these lovers out,” and loaded them
into the truck. Art drove a very short distance down the dirt road behind the store to a large
refrigerator. Art locked Fran and Mark in the refrigerator. Art then returned to the store to
pick up Ben, who took $250 from the cash register on his way out of the store.
The next day, the store manager saw that things were amiss and called police, who
rescued Fran and Mark from the refrigerator. Fran suffered no significant injury, but Mark
soon developed pneumonia and died as a result of it several weeks later. The coroner’s
report showed that Mark had an extraordinary susceptibility to pneumonia and that it was
triggered by exposure to the combination of viruses and the intense cold of the refrigerator.
1. What criminal charges, if any, should be brought against Art and Ben? Discuss.
2. What defenses, if any, do Art and Ben have to the criminal charges? Discuss.
-22-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
State v. Art
Conspiracy
An agreement between two or more persons to commit a crime.
Art and Ben decided to rob the local convenience store. This decision, mutually
made, constituted an agreement. Art had both the intent to agree at the time the
agreement was formed, and also the intent to commit the criminal act, satisfying the mens
rea requirement for conspiracy.
Therefore, Art will be guilty of conspiracy.
Pinkerton’s Rule
Under Pinkerton’s rule, a defendant is guilty of all crimes foreseeably carried out in
furtherance of the conspiracy. Therefore, though Art did not actually commit a larceny,
larceny was a foreseeable crime, given the nature of the conspiracy, and Art will be guilty
though he did not actually commit the act.
Attempted Robbery
Attempt is a substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended crime.
Robbery is the taking of personal property by force or threat of force from the person
of the victim.
Art, with the specific intent to rob the convenience store, took an unloaded pistol and
went to the store, proclaiming that it was a robbery. He will argue that the pistol was
unloaded, and that he therefore did not use force; however it will suffice for the threat of
force requirement for burglary and the apparent ability test for attempt. Art was apparently
able to rob the store. In addition, it was both legally and factually possible to rob the store,
and Art was in the process of perpetrating the crime.
Therefore Art will be guilty of attempted robbery.
Assault
Assault is either a substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery,
or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of imminent bodily harm.
Art went into the store with a gun, pointing it at the people inside. This constituted
a conditional threat, not an imminent threat of battery, and therefore would not constitute
-23-
an assault.
However, Art went further than this, loading Mark and Fran in the truck. It is
reasonable to infer that both Mark and Fran were placed in apprehension of this battery
before it occurred, and in addition, Art committed a substantial step towards perpetration
of the intended battery.
Therefore Art will be guilty of assault.
Battery
The unlawful application of force to the person of another.
Art loaded Mark and Fran into the truck. He had no legal authority to do so, and his
application of force was therefore unlawful.
Therefore Art will be guilty of battery.
Merger
Though Art is guilty of both assault and battery, assault is a lesser included offense
to the battery, and therefore the state will only obtain a conviction on one or the other
crime.
False Imprisonment
The unlawful confinement of another, within fixed bounds, for any period of time.
The state would bring two counts of false imprisonment against Art. First, he loaded
Mark and Fran into the truck. The[y] had no reasonable escape, and were confined against
their will without legal authority.
Second, Art placed Mark and Fran into the refrigerator. They could not get out, and
were subjected to the cold temperatures until rescued, hours later.
Therefore, Art will be guilty of false imprisonment.
Kidnapping
The intentional confinement and asportation of another.
Art confined Mark and Fran in the back of the truck, as discussed supra. In addition,
he drove them down the road.
Art could argue that, because he did not drive them very far, he did not asport Mark
and Fran. However, asportation takes merely the slightest movement once the victim has
-24-
been confined. Therefore the short drive was sufficient.
Therefore Art will be guilty of kidnapping.
Murder
Homicide committed with malice aforethought.
Homicide
The killing of a human being by another human being.
Art subjected Mark to the cold of the refrigerator, which led to Mark’s death by
pneumonia.
Actual Cause
But for the actions for Art, Mark would not have gotten pneumonia and died.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable that placing a person in a refrigerator will result in his sickness, and
possibly death.
Art would argue that the susceptibility of Mark to pneumonia constituted an
intervening cause that would break the chain of guilt. However, to be sufficient for an
intervening cause, the condition cannot be pre-existing. Mark’s susceptibility was in
existence before being placed in the refrigerator, and is therefore not an intervening cause.
Malice
The prosecution can prove malice in any one of four ways: 1) Intent to kill; 2) Intent
to cause serious bodily harm; 3) A depraved heart act; or 4) The felony murder rule. In this
case, the prosecution will argue intent to cause serious bodily harm, the depraved heart
act, and the felony murder rule.
1. Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Harm. Intent is either desire to bring about a
particular result, or knowledge to a substantial degree of certainty that such a result will
occur. The prosecution will argue that Art knew that serious bodily harm was likely to occur
by placing two people in a refrigerator. Art would argue that the substantial certainty did
not rise to the level necessary. A jury would have to decide, but it is likely that a jury would
agree with Art.
2. A Depraved Heart Act. The defense would argue that, even if Art’s actions
did not rise to the level of intent, they were severely reckless in regards to the safety of
-25-
Mark and Fran. The prosecution is likely to succeed in its recklessness contention.
3. The Felony Murder Rule. The prosecution will argue that the death occurred
in the perpetration of an inherently dangerous felony. Art and Ben were still in the res
gestae of the attempted robbery, having not [sic] reached any place of temporary safety,
and Art was also committing the felony of kidnapping. Both robbery and kidnapping are
inherently dangerous felonies for the purpose of this rule.
First Degree Murder
Murder premeditated and deliberated with the specific intent to kill, murder by the
felony murder rule, or murder by bomb, torture, ambush, or poison.
As discussed supra, the prosecution will argue that this murder was under the felony
murder rule. They are likely to succeed in this argument, and therefore this murder will be
made murder in the first degree.
Second Degree Murder
All murders not first degree.
If the prosecution is unable to prove that the felony murder rule applies, they will fall
back on the depraved heart act requirement, and the murder will be second degree.
Voluntary Manslaughter
Homicide with malice, but with adequate provocation or mistaken justification.
Art will argue that seeing his girlfriend with another guy constituted adequate
provocation. To be successful, Art would have to argue four things:
1. He was actually provoked. Art was jealous when he saw his girlfriend with
another guy. However, he would have to show that this provocation made him act in the
heat of passion, not under calm will. Because he was so enraged, it is likely that Art would
be able to prove this point.
2. A reasonable person would have provoked. Art is unlikely to be able to show
that a reasonable person would be provoked by seeing a girlfriend in a store with someone
that worked at the store. The facts give us no indication that there was any
reasonableness to Art’s jealousy.
3. He did not cool off. Art acted immediately after he became enraged. He did
not cool off.
4. A reasonable person would not have cooled off. Because the actions were
immediate, a reasonable person probably would not have cooled off.
-26-
Because a reasonable person would probably not have been so enraged as to act
in the heat of passion, this murder will not be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Homicide without malice, but with criminal negligence or under the misdemeanor
manslaughter rule.
If the prosecution is unable to prove malice, they will fall back on involuntary
manslaughter.
Therefore, Art is probably guilty of first degree murder.
Accomplice Liability
The state will also argue that Art acted as an accomplice to Ben’s larceny, to be
discussed infra. Art acted as a facilitator and aider of Ben’s larceny, and will therefore be
an accomplice.
Defenses
Voluntary Intoxication
Art had been drinking heavily before the crimes were committed. Because this is
voluntary intoxication, it will only serve as a defense if it can negate the mens rea of the
crime. Therefore it will not apply at all to battery, being a general intent crime, or to murder
under the depraved heart act or felony murder rule, unless it knocks out one of the felonies.
However, Art will argue voluntary intoxication for the remaining strict liability
offenses. He will have to show that the intoxication actually overcame his specific intent.
Based on the facts, it is not likely that Art would be able to prove this. He was cognizant
enough to become jealous and enraged, indicating that he could think in a rational way,
despite the drinking.
Therefore this defense will not absolve Art of culpability.
Diminished Capacity
In a minority of jurisdictions, the defendant will be acquitted if some action or insane
impulse diminished his capacity to reason and think through his actions. Because, as
discussed supra, Art was still apparently able to reason cognizantly, this defense will not
apply.
Therefore this defense will not absolve Art of culpability.
-27-
State v. Ben
Conspiracy
Defined supra.
Ben entered the same agreement discussed supra, with the requisite intent.
Therefore Ben is guilty of conspiracy.
Pinkerton’s Rule
Ben did not actually commit the crimes of kidnapping or false imprisonment.
However, these crimes are all reasonably foreseeable in perpetration of a conspiracy to
commit robbery, and Ben will therefore be guilty of them.
Robbery
Defined supra.
Ben entered the store waving a gun and demanding money. However, he did not
actually take the money until Mark and Fran had been locked in the refrigerator. To
constitute robbery, the taking must be from the person of the victim, which was not the case
here.
The state could argue that, because the victims were forcibly removed from the
scene of the crime, there was a constructive taking from the person of the victim. However,
the state is not likely to succeed in this argument, because the taking and the victim were
so far removed.
Therefore Ben is not guilty of robbery.
Attempted Robbery
Defined supra.
Ben, in participating in the same actions as Art did, will be guilty of this crime in the
same way. The discussion, supra, is applicable here.
Therefore Ben is guilty of attempted robbery.
Larceny
-28-
The trespassory taking of the personal property of another, with specific intent to
permanently deprive the owner thereof.
Ben grabbed money on the way out, intending to keep it permanently. He had no
claim of right to the money, and his taking was therefore trespassory.
Therefore Ben is guilty of larceny.
Mispris[i]on
Failure to report the known felonious conduct of another.
While Art was out kidnapping Mark and Fran on his trip to the refrigerator, Ben was
left alone in the store. He knew of the felonious conduct of Art, and did not report it.
Therefore Ben is guilty of mispris[i]on.
Murder
Homicide
Defined supra.
Actual and proximate cause discussed supra.
Malice
Defined supra.
The prosecution will argue the felony murder rule against Ben. The murder of Mark,
as discussed supra, occurred in the commission of an inherently dangerous felony. Under
the felony murder rule, all co-felons are equally guilty. Ben was a co-felon in the attempted
robbery and an accomplice to the kidnapping, and therefore the prosecution will be able
to show malice.
First Degree Murder
Defined supra.
This murder will be first degree, as based on the felony murder rule.
Therefore Ben will be guilty of first degree murder.
Accomplice Liability
Though Ben did not actually commit the crimes of kidnapping and false
-29-
imprisonment, he was an accessory to them as a co-felon. He will therefore be held to be
guilty of these crimes.
Defenses
Ben will argue the same defenses to his crimes as Art would. It is likely that his
defenses would fail, because he seems to be acting in full awareness of what he is doing.
-30-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
Question 1
State v. Art (A) and Ben (B)
Conspiracy to commit robbery
Conspiracy is an agreement b/n 2 or more people to commit an unlawful act.
At common law, conspiracy is complete upon agreement. Here, there is an agreement b/n
A and B, as facts show A and B decided to rob the local store. As such, there is a
conspiracy at common law.
Modernly, a conspiracy is shown through an overt act. Here, A and B entered the store
and yelled “This is a stick up” with pistols, which is an overt act. As such, there is
conspiracy modernly.
Pinkerton rule
Under the Pinkerton rule, a coconspirator is liable for the acts of the other that are
foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy. As such, A and B would be liable for the
acts of the other that are foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy to commit
robbery.
Burglary of store
At common law, burglary is the trespassory breaking and entering of a dwelling house at
nighttime with the intent to commit a felony therein.
The state will not find a common law burglary, b/c there was no breaking by A and B, as
facts state the all-night store was open for business, and there is no dwelling house, since
it was a convenience store.
Modern burglary
Instead, the state will show there was modern burglary, which does not include a breaking,
dwelling house, nighttime, or felony.
Here, there was a trespassory entry by A and B, since they did not have the consent of the
store’s owner to rob the store, and the facts state they entered the store. There was a
structure, as a store is deemed to be a structure. There was the intent to commit a crime,
robbery.
As such, A and B are guilty of modern burglary.
-31-
State v. A
Kidnapping/re: Fran (F) and Mark (M)
Kidnapping is false imprisonment with movement. (False imprisonment is the confinement
of a person by another with the victim’s consent).
There was a confinement by A, of F and M, without their consent, as facts state he locked
them in a refrigerator and the facts do not show he had their consent to do so. The
confinement of F and M was with movement, as facts show he moved them from the store
into his truck.
As such, A is guilty of kidnapping.
Pinkerton/B’s liability
Since the act of kidnapping was not foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy to
rob, as facts show A was jealous of F and M and decided to kidnap them, B will not be
liable for F’s act under Pinkerton.
Battery of F and M
Battery is the harmful or offensive touching to the person of another.
Since the facts state A loaded F and M into his truck, there is an offensive touching by A.
A is guilty of battery.
Pinkerton/B’s liability
Since the act of A’s battery was not foreseeable and not in furtherance of the conspiracy
to rob, B will not guilty [sic] of A’s act under Pinkerton.
Homicide of M
Homicide is the killing of one person by another. Here, there is a killing of M, since the
facts show he died from being locked in the refrigerator by A. However, there may be an
issue as to causation since it is not clear whether M was killed by being locked in the
refrigerator or due to his susceptibility to pneumonia.
Actual cause
-32-
But for A locking M in the refrigerator, M would not have died. A is the actual cause of M’s
death.
Proximate cause
A foreseeable consequence of A’s locking M in the refrigerator is that M would die.
Intervening act
A will assert there was the intervening act of M’s susceptibility to the pneumonia.
However, M’s susceptibility to pneumonia would be considered foreseeable and not
superseding, since a person’s condition of susceptibility to certain things is foreseeable.
As such, A is the proximate cause of M’s death.
Murder/2nd degree murder of M
The state’s best charge against A is to charge him with 2nd degree murder of M. The felony
murder rule will not attach here, since the killing of M was not independent of the inherently
dangerous felony, kidnapping, as facts state A was upset at M and F and decided to “chill
these lovers out”.
Murder is homicide plus malice aforethought.
The state will show malice aforethought through the following:
Intent to kill/Intent to cause serious bodily harm
The state will argue that A had the intent to kill, as facts state he stated “We’ll chill these
lovers out” and proceeded to lock M in the refrigerator, and left him in there for good.
However, A will counter argue that he did not have the intent to kill, since he locked M in
a refrigerator, which is not as cold or deadly as a freezerm [sic], and he merely was upset
at F and M and decided to lock them up.
The state will rebut and state that even if A did not manifest an intent to kill, then certainly
locking a person inside a refrigerator, with no breathing holes, and intense cold
temperatures manifests an intent to cause serious bodily harm.
Thus, more facts are needed to ascertain whether A had an intent to kill, and the state will
show A’s intent to cause serious bodily harm.
Wanton and reckless
-33-
Wanton and reckless is an extreme indifference to the value of human life. Locking a
human inside a confined space such as refrigerator [sic] with no way of getting out exhibits
an extreme indifference to the value of human life. As such, A was wanton and reckless.
Thus, the state will find A guilty of 2nd degree murder of M.
Voluntary manslaughter/sudden heat of passion
The defense will mitigate A’s 2nd degree murder charge down to voluntary manslaughter
via sudden heat of passion.
Sudden heat of passion
The state will show the following:
The defendant acted from passion rather than reason, as facts state A was upset that F,
as his steady girlfriend, had been spending time with M, and saw M and F together at the
store, when he became enraged and locked them in the refrigerator.
A reasonable person would act from passion rather than reason, as a reasonable person
would become enraged if his girlfriend was caught spending time with another man, and
that man was someone the person was already suspicious about in the first place.
There was no cooling off time b/n the passion and the killing, as facts state A became
enraged upon seeing F and M together and proceeded to kidnap and lock them in the
refrigerator.
As such, the state will successfully mitigate down to voluntary manslaughter via sudden
heat of passion.
A is guilty of voluntary manslaughter.
Pinkerton/B’s liability
Since the act of A’s killing of M was not foreseeable and not in furtherance of the
conspiracy, B is not guilty of voluntary manslaughter of M.
Attempted murder of F
Specific intent
At issue here is whether A had the specific intent to kill, as facts do not demonstrate A
wanted to kill F. However, locking one in refrigerator [sic] under cold temperatures would
manifest an intent to kill.
-34-
A had the apparent ability to kill, as facts state A locked F inside the refrigerator. A was
dangerously close to perpetration, as opposed to preparation state, as facts state F was
locked inside by A[.] It was only factually impossible as opposed to legally impossible for
A to kill F, since F was rescued the next day but would have died if she were not rescued.
As such, A is guilty of attempted murder.
Pinkerton/B’s liability
Since the act of A’s attempted murder was not foreseeable and not in furtherance, B is not
guilty of attempted murder under Pinkerton.
State v. B
Robbery of store/$250
Robbery is larceny plus force or intimidation.
There was force/intimidation, as facts state B bran[d]ished a pistol while yelling “This is a
stick up”.
Larceny is a trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with
the intent to deprive permanently.
There was a tresspassory taking and carrying away, as facts state B took and carried away
$250 without the consent of store’s owner. The money was the personal property of
another, since the facts state it was in the cash register and belonged to the store. B had
the intent to deprive permanently, as facts state he left the store w/the money, thus
depriving the store of the money permanently.
As such, B is guilty of robbery.
Pinkerton/A’s liability
Since the act of B’s robbery was foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy to
commit robbery, A will be guilty of robbery.
Question 2
Defense by A and B
-35-
The only defense available to criminal charges of A and B is to assert intoxication, b/c it
negates the requisite specific intent.
Intoxication
A and B will argue that they should be acquitted of the abovementioned crimes (except A’s
battery charge), since they are all specific intent crimes. A and B will assert that they were
heavily intoxicated and could not form the specific intent to commit these crimes, as facts
state they committed these crimes after drinking heavily.
However, the state will argue that A and B were not intoxicated to the point that they could
not form the requisite specific intent to commit these crimes, since the facts show A and
B were still able to drive to the store to rob it and get away, and A was able to drive the
truck to another location during the robbery to confine F and M in a refrigerator.
As such, A and B’s intoxication defense fails and A and B will be charged with the
abovementioned crimes.
-36-
Question 4
Carol stopped her car at the entrance to her office building to get some papers from her
office. She left her car unlocked and left the ignition key under the car’s front floor mat
while she went briefly into her office.
While Carol was gone, Peter entered Carol’s car, found the ignition key where he had seen
her leave it, and started the car, intending to drive it to the hospital where his spouse had
just been taken for emergency treatment. After Peter had driven the car for about a block,
the brakes failed, the car hit a tree, and Peter was injured. In a dazed condition from the
accident, Peter entered a nearby public building and pulled the lever of an emergency fire
alarm. A city fire truck, responding to the alarm, hit and seriously injured Carol as she was
emerging from her office building.
What claims, if any, do Carol and Peter have against each other, and what defenses, if any,
may each assert? Discuss.
-37-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
4)
PETER v. CAROL
1) ISSUE - NEGLIGENCE?
Under tort law, negligence is a failure to exercise the degree of car[e] a reasonable person
would have exercised in the same situation. A prima facie case of negligence requires a
showing of 1) duty, 2) breach, 3) actual cause, 4) proximate cause, and 5) damages.
DUTY
Every person is under a duty to act as a reasonable person and not expose others to an
unreasonable risk of harm.
Here, Carol had a duty to keep her brakes maintained in proper working order to protect
her fellow drivers and pedestrians from an unreasonable risk of harm. Furthermore, she
had a duty not to expose her dangerous car to others by properly securing it when she left
it unattended.
Therefore, Carol owes a duty to Peter.
BREACH
A breach is a failure to exercise the degree of due care which a reasonable person would
have exercised in the same situation.
Here, Carol breached her duty of due care when she left her car unlocked and keys under
the floor mat because anyone could get in her car with poorly maintained breaks [sic].
Therefore, she breached her duty to secure her car.
RES IPSA LOQUITOR
Under res ipsa loquitor an inference of negligence is raised when 1) the injury would not
have occurred absent negligence, 2) the defendant was in exclusive control over the
instrumentality causing the injury, and 3) the plaintiff did not contribute to his own injury.
Here, 1) brakes do not fail unless someone is negligent in their maintenance and 2) Carol
was in exclusive control of her car and its maintenance. However, Peter did contribute to
his own injury by jumping into Carol’s car with no knowledge of its safety.
Therefore, Peter will not be able to use res ipsa.
-38-
ACTUAL CAUSE
A defendant’s act is the actual cause of the plaintiff[‘]s injury if it would not have occurred
but for the defendant’s act.
Here, but for Carol leaving her car unlocked and keys under the floor mat Peter would not
have been injured.
Therefore, Carol is the actual cause of the Peter’s [sic] harm.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause means that the plaintiff[‘]s injury is a direct and natural result of the
defendant[‘]s act, uninterrupted by unforeseeable intervening act. That [sic] the law will
hold the defendant liable for the harm.
Here, it was foreseeable that someone like Peter would drive away in Carol’s car after
seeing her leave her keys under the floor mat and door unlocked.
Therefore, Carol is the proximate cause of Peter’s injuries.
DAMAGES
Here, Peter was injured when he hit a nearby tree.
Carol will be liable for his general damages, pain and suffering[,] as well as his special
damages such as medical bills, and lost wages.
2) ISSUE - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE?
Conduct of the plaintiff falling below the standard of care for which she is required to
conform for her own protection which will bar the plaintiff’s recovery.
Here, Peter driving away Carol’s car without her consent was unreasonable conduct which
fell below the standard of care which she is required to conform for her own protection.
Therefore, Peter will be barred from recovery.
3) ISSUE - COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE?
Under comparative negligence a plaintiff’s recovery will be diminished the amount which
his own negligence contributed to the injury.
Here, Peter contributed to his own injuries by driving away Carol’s car without her consent.
-39-
A court will determine how much his own negligence should diminish his recovery.
Therefore, Peter’s recovery will be diminished.
4) ISSUE - ASSUMPTION OF RISK?
When a defendant knows of and appreciates a risk and voluntarily encounters it he may
be barred from a recovery.
Here, Carol will argue that Peter knew her car might not be in a safe condition when he
voluntarily encountered the risk by driving it away without her consent. However,
reasonable people do not cars [sic] to have faulty breaks [sic] and therefore Peter did not
know of the risk.
Therefore, this defense will not be successful.
CAROL v. PETER
5) ISSUE - TRESPASS TO CHATTEL?
A trespass to chattel is an intentional interference with the chattel of another without
consent or privilege. An act is intentional if done out of a desire or with knowledge of
substantial certainty that the result will occur.
Here, Peter acted [sic] intentionally interfered with Carol[‘]s chattel when he started Carol[‘]s
car and drove it away because he intended to drive it to the hospital. Furthermore, he did
not have Carol[‘]s consent or privilege (infra).
Therefore, Peter is liable to Carol for trespass to chattel and is liable for the cost of repair
and reasonable rental value.
6) ISSUE - CONVERSION?
Under tort law, conversion is the exercise of dominion and control over the chattel of
another causing a substantial interference with the chattel that the defendant will be forced
to pay the full market value of the chattel, a forced sale.
Here, Peter intentionally interfered with Carol[‘]s chattel as discussed supra. Further he
exercised dominion and control by driving the car. If a court finds that the interference was
substantial he may be liable under this tort.
Therefore, Peter may be liable for conversion.
7) ISSUE - NECESSITY?
-40-
A defendant may be privileged to reasonably interfere with the property rights of another
if acting due to an imminent threat and to protect his person or property. However, he is
liable for all damage cause[d] due to his interference.
Here, Peter will argue that he was privileged to take Carol’s car because he was
reasonably acting to protect his wife. This argument will fail because there was no
imminent threat to himself or his property which could be mitigated by him taking a car and
driving to the hospital.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
8) ISSUE - NEGLIGENCE?
Under tort law, negligence is a failure to exercise the degree of car[e] a reasonable person
would have exercised in the same situation. A prima facie case of negligence requires a
showing of 1) duty, 2) breach, 3) actual cause, 4) proximate cause, and 5) damages.
DUTY
Every person is under a duty to act as a reasonable person and not expose others to an
unreasonable risk of harm. Under Palsgraf, Cardozo held that a defendant who creates
peril owes a duty to the people who could reasonably be foreseen as being harmed by the
peril, the zone of danger.
Here, Peter had a duty to act reasonably in seeking medical attention for his injuries and
not creating peril for others in the process.
Therefore, Peter owes a duty to Carol.
BREACH
A breach is a failure to exercise the degree of due care which a reasonable person would
have exercised in the same situation.
Here, Peter breached his duty when he pulled “the lever of an emergency fire alarm”,
because this caused the city fire truck to respond to the alarm[,] thereby endangering the
safety of the fireman, pedestrians and drivers.
Therefore, Peter breached his duty.
ACTUAL CAUSE
A defendant’s act is the actual cause of the plaintiff[’]s injury if it would not have occurred
but for the defendant’s act.
-41-
Here, but for Peter pulling the emergency fire alarm Carol would not have been injured.
Therefore, Peter is the actual cause of Carol’s harm.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause means that the plaintiff[‘]s injury is a direct and natural result of the
defendant[‘]s act, uninterrupted by unforeseeable intervening act. That [sic] the law will
hold the defendant liable for the harm.
Here, it was foreseeable that a pedestrian, such as Carol, would be injured by the peril
created by Peter’s negligent act.
Therefore, Peter is the proximate cause of Carol’s.
DAMAGES
Here, Carol was seriously injured.
Peter will be liable for Carol’s general damages, pain and suffering as well as her special
damages such as medical bills, and lost wages.
2) ISSUE - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE?
Conduct of the plaintiff falling below the standard of care for which she is required to
conform for her own protection which will bar the plaintiff’s recovery.
Here, Peter will argue that it [sic] Carol[‘]s own negligence[,] discussed supra [,] was a
contributing factor to her own injury. However, the link between Carol’s negligence and her
own injuries is extremely attenuated.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
3) ISSUE - COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE?
Under comparative negligence a plaintiff’s recovery will be diminished the amount which
his own negligence contributed to the injury.
Here, Peter will argue that it [sic] Carol[‘]s own negligence[,] discussed supra [,] was a
contributing factor to her own injury. However, the link between Carol’s negligence and her
own injuries is extremely attenuated.
Therefore, Carol’s recovery will not be diminished.
-42-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
Carol v. Peter
Carol may assert a negligence claim against Peter.
Negligence is conduct which falls below the relevant standard of care established by law
for the protection of others against unreasonable risks of harm.
To prove a prima facie case of negligence the plaintiff must prove by a
preponderance of evidence that the defendant 1) owed a duty to the plaintiff 2) breached
that duty 3) is the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injuries and 4) the injuries
resulted in damages.
Duty?
Duty is the standard of care to act as a reasonably prudent person under same or
similar like [sic] circumstances to all for[e]seeable plaintiffs.
Peter was under an emergency to try and get to his wife who was receiving
emergency treatment. Peter will be held to such a standard and the jury will decide what
is reasonable under these circumstances[.]
Yet, Peter owes a duty to Carol to act reasonable and not cause her any
unreasonable risks of harm.
Breach
Breach of duty occurs when the defendant[‘]s conduct falls below the established
standard of care.
Here, if it was found that Peter should have used caution and not wrecked into a tree
then he may have breached a duty to Carol.
Causation?
Actual cause is found when the defendant’s breach is the direct cause or the
substantial factor of the plaintiff’s injuries. Proximate cause is found when there are no
unfor[e]seeable superceding intervening acts which will cut off liability.
Here it was the fire truck which directly hit and injured Carol. Still as Peter’s accident
and pulling of the alarm is the reason [sic] they were on the scene Peter is the substantial
factor.
Also, it is for[e]seeable that when one is in an accident and you pull an alarm that
-43-
someone will come to rescue, the fire truck[‘]s presence is for[e]seeable. Still, it is
questionable whether the court will actually find the fact that Carol emerging out of her
office resulting in being hit under Peter’s for[e]seeable injures (caused by Peter). This may
be far too remote and the court will cut off liability under proximate cause.
Damages
General damages may be awarded if the injury resulted in past present future
medical bills, lost wages[,] etc.
Carol was injured by the truck seriously[sic], and if the court does not cut off liability
under proximate cause then she may recover general damages.
Trespass to Chattel?
Trespass to chattel is when one intentionally interferes with the possessory rights
of another over their personal property.
As Peter intended to take Carol’s car which she rightfully possessed and he did not
gain her consent, he will be liable for the harm incurred by such interference.
Conversion
Conversion is when one intentionally places dominion and control over the personal
property which substantially interferes with the possessor[‘]s ownership.
Here, Peter took Carol’s car and wrecked it. He will be held responsible for the harm
to the car under trespass to chattel, yet if the car is no longer useable he may be liable for
the amount of the full car.
Defenses
Negligence
Contributory and comparative negligence is when the plaintiff’s conduct falls below
the standard of conduct which one is expected to conform to for his own safety and is a
contributing cause to the defendant[‘]s negligence in bringing about the plaintiff’s harm.
Contributory negligence at common law was a total bar to a plaintiff[‘]s recovery.
Comparative, under pure comparative jurisdictions, award damages only if contribution was
less than 50% and under all comparative jurisdictions the damages are based on
percentages.
Peter will assert the defense that Carol was negligent as to the defective breaks
[sic], leaving her keys in the car and emerging out of the office without looking. Discussed
more infra...
-44-
Carol’s damages will be completely barred under contributory negligence and may
be deemed as a high percentage as to contribution to her own harm and will be more than
50%, therefore only under comparative negligence she may be awarded any damages, if
at all.
Trespass to Chattel and Conversion Necessity
Necessity may be a defense to intentional torts but if it is a private necessity the
defendant must pay for any harm done to the property, and cannot have been the factor
placing him in the circumstance.
Here, Peter’s wife was in emergency treatment and Peter may claim he used the car
out of the necessity to get to her. He will however be liable for the damages to the car.
Peter v. Carol
Peter may assert a claim against Carol in negligence.
Defined supra...
Duty supra...
Carol owed a duty to the public to not leave her keys in the car. As this was not the
cause of Peter[’]s harm this action, conduct will not help Peter’s claim.
Still, Carol owes a duty to warn of her deficient breaks [sic] to potential users. As
she failed to do so, coupled with the fact of leaving keys in the car she owed a duty to Peter
to warn of the bad breaks [sic].
Breach
Defined supra...
When Carol failed to act reasonably and leave her keys in the car knowing her
breaks [sic] were bad and that someone may use the car (since it was unlocked) she
breached her duty owed to Peter.
Causation?
Defined supra...
The failure of the breaks [sic] were the direct cause of Peter’s injuries, and if Carol
had not left the door unlocked and keys in the car, or warned (or fixed) of the bad breaks
[sic] Peter would not have been hurt. Therefore Carol was a substantial factor.
It is also for[e]seeable that someone will use the car with bad breaks [sic] if the keys
are left in it (possible for[e]seeable criminal activity) and Carol is the proximate cause.
Carol may argue that Peter’s conduct was an intervening act, still as stated above
it was for[e]seeable and Carol is the cause of Peter’s injuries.
-45-
Damages
Supra...
Peter may be awarded damages for his injuries resulting from the accident, and
delay by the fire truck hitting Carol.
Defenses
Contributing and Comparative
Supra...
As Peter was negligent above under contributory he is completely barred and under
comparative he may, less likely, be awarded a small percentage.


















California
First-Year
Law Students’
Examination
Essay Questions
and
Selected Answers
October 2004
-i-
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
OCTOBER 2004 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS’ EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2004 California First Year
Law Students’ Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the
examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in
spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here
with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the
essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number Subject Page
1. Criminal Law 1
2. Contracts 9
3. Torts 19
4. Criminal Law 28
-ii-
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the
difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and
fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand
the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their
relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason
in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not
merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your
proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit.
State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal
doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general
application.
-1-
Question 1
Al went to Dan’s gun shop to purchase a handgun and ammunition. Dan showed Al
several pistols. Al selected the one he wanted and handed Dan five $100 bills to pay for
it. Dan put the unloaded pistol and a box of ammunition in a bag and placed it on the
counter.
While Al was filling out the necessary registration papers, Dan went to the cash register to
make change. As he was doing so, Dan noticed that the bills Al had handed him were
counterfeit, and he exclaimed, “You rotten bum! You’ve given me phony money.”
At that moment, Al grabbed the bag that had the gun and ammunition in it and fled from the
gun shop. Dan grabbed a loaded pistol he kept under the counter and ran after Al, yelling
at him to stop. As Dan pursued Al down the street, he fired a shot into the air, and yelled,
“If you don’t stop, the next shot will stop you.” Al kept running, and, as he did so, he loaded
a cartridge into the pistol he had fled the gun shop with, turned, and shot toward Dan. The
bullet struck and killed Dan.
1. What legal justification, if any, did Dan have (a) pursuing Al, and (b)
threatening Al with deadly force? Discuss.
2. With what crimes can Al be charged, and what defenses, if any, can he
assert? Discuss
-2-
Answer A to Question 1
Larceny
Larceny is the intentional taking and carrying away the property of another with the intent
to permanently deprive thereof. Al took possession of the gun and ammunition under false
pretenses, i.e. by giving fraudulent money (counterfeit) to Dan. Al therefore obtained
possession of the gun and ammunition unlawfully, such that the taking and carrying away
was of the property of Dan[.] Dan was justified in his pursuit of Al in that he was legally the
owner of the property that Al took, and a person is legally entitled to retrieve property that
is rightfully theirs. The retrieval of the property must be immediate for it to be justifiable to
use force (lawful) to retrieve. Dan was in hot pursuit of Al, as Al had just taken the goods

from his store.
Dan was therefore justified in pursuing Al, as the lapse of time between the asportation of
the goods, and Dan’s discovery of the good’s missing, was almost immediate. A person
is entitled to use reasonable force necessary to retrieve stolen goods, if they are in hot
pursuit, i.e. immediate pursuit of the stolen items.
Therefore, although deadly force is never allowed in the defense or retrieval of property,
if the owner of the property is in hot pursuit of the property, reasonable force may be used
to retrieve the property. It was reasonably foreseeable that Dan would run after Al to
retrieve his stolen property as the occurrence of the taking was immediate. It could be
argued that the firing of a shot into the air was not the use of reasonable force a person
is lawfully entitled to use to retrieve their property. Dan, however, could argue that as he
was in hot pursuit of his property it was “reasonable” force to fire the pistol in the air, in
order to scare the felon, Al, into stopping in his tracks. Dan could argue that his words
were reasonable given the immediacy of the situation and his right to retrieve his property.
Al could counter that because deadly force is never justified in the retrieval of property, the
fact that Dan fired a shot in the air and stated the words “If you don’t stop, the next shot will
stop you” there was more than the use of reasonably[sic] force used by Dan, because he
(Dan) had the apparent ability to carry out his threat.
Assault is the apprehension of an immediate battery. Al could argue that Dan was not
justified in his pursuit as the assault was coupled with words and the present ability to carry
out the use of deadly force[.] Dan could counter (if he were alive) that he was justified in
pursuing Al with deadly force. A civilian is privileged to make a lawful arrest of a felon.
Their belief that a felony is being committed must be reasonable. In this case, Dan knew
that Al had committed a felony. Al had given him counterfeit bills, and had obtained
possession by trick.
Larceny by trick is when a person obtains property possession by deceit. In this case, title
did not pass because Al took possession of the gun, knowing that the money he paid for
it was counterfeit. Title did not pass, as Dan discovered the counterfeit before he gave the
-3-
gun & ammo to Al. But he intend[ed] to pass title, so it could be inferred that Al committed
the crime of false pretenses. Because Al had committed a felony, false pretenses, Dan
could justifiably arrest him, because he reasonably believed Al had committed a felony, by
obtaining property under false pretenses – the gun was not fully registered to him, which
would have been title, because it does not appear that Al completed the paperwork. Had
the transaction been complete & then Dan found out the money was counterfeit – it would
have been larceny by trick, in which title would have passed.
A felony has been committed, and a civilian’s entitled to use force necessary to arrest the
felon, but it must be reasonable. Dan, again, could argue that it was reasonable to fire a
gun & yell at Al, as Al had stolen a gun & ammunition, & was therefore armed &
dangerous. However, the gun was not loaded, therefore, deadly force which Dan could be
found guilty of applying, if the words he used, coupled with the firing of the shot, were
found to be an immediate threat of deadly force capable of being performed which may not
have been justified given the fact that Al was fleeing and therefore the force that could be
reasonably used to stop a fleeing felon was not justifiable to be deadly force. The gun Al
carried was not loaded, and he was fleeing from Dan. Dan[,] it could be argued, could
have reasonably believed that Al loaded the gun & he was using reasonable force to stop
a dangerous fleeing felon – who had committed an inherently dangerous felony – theft of
a firearm and ammunition.
A shopkeeper is entitled legally to detain a customer they believe is unlawfully attempting
to steal from them. Dan could argue successfully here, it was within his rights to lawfully
detain Al for a reasonable time to question him, as he reasonably believed the money was
counterfeit.
II. Al can be charged with obtaining property by false pretenses. False pretenses is
obtaining title of the property by the use of deceit. It is a specific intent crime. Here, it can
be inferred that Al intentional[ly] gave Dan 5 $100 bills that were counterfeit. Al could have
argued that he did not know the bills were counterfeit, however, he took the gun & ammo
& ran, therefore, it can reasonably be inferred that Al knew the bills were no good. On the
other hand, Al could argue that he did not know the money was bad & when Dan yelled at
him “You rotten bum”. . . . “Al got terrified & fled from the shop. Al could argue that he was
registering the gun, which indicated that he intended to lawfully obtain title to the gun.
However, it could be argued that a reasonable person would not have run, however,
nonetheless, Al may have personal reasons for his reaction to Dan. This theory may be
found to be a bit reaching, but could be arguably used to find Al lacked the requisite
specific intent necessary to be found guilty of the specific intent crime of false pretenses.
A crime require[s] mens reas [sic] & actus reas [sic]. The mental state is necessary, along
with an act – physical move.
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away the property of another with the intent
to permanently deprive thereof. It could be argued that Al intended to take the gun and
ammo – there is an asportation (required for larceny) as Al moved the gun & ammo. [A]ny
-4-
movement of the property is sufficient to meet the requirement of asportation. Here there
was a lot of movement as Al hot[-]tailed it out of the gun shop. Larceny is a specific intent
crime; the actor must intend to deprive the owner of the property. Al could argue that he
took the gun & ammo “at that moment” that Dan yelled at him regarding the $ counterfeit
[sic]. Al could argue that he was shocked by Dan’s accusation & fearful of Dan because
Dan did own a gun shop & more than likely possessed a loaded pistol. Al could argue that
because he thought the money was legitimate, and perhaps Dan was acting unreasonably,
that he was fearful of his life & believing that he lawfully purchased the gun & ammo – took
his property & left Dan’s shop. Title had not passed, only possession however, as the
requisite paperwork – registration papers had not been filled out fully. Therefore Al
obtained property possession[,] not title. If he is found to have intentionally passed
counterfeit bills to Dan, he may be found guilty of larceny by trick – unlawfully obtaining
property by the use of deceit.
If Al argues against the larceny charges successfully, he could be successful in
establishing that it was his property. However, as stated earlier, a shopkeeper is entitled
to lawfully detain a customer if he reasonably believes the customer is attempting to
defraud him. Al could be found guilty of larceny based on violation of this law[.] Al could
argue that the property he took, he believed, was (reasonably) his. It could be argued
against Al, that continuing to run is unnecessary & unreasonable due to the fact that Dan
had only said “You rotten bum – you’ve given me phony money” – Al could counter that he
knew Dan had grabbed a gun & that he was afraid for his life & so he ran from Dan, when
[D]an fired the shot & yelled that the next shot will stop him, the immediacy of the potential
for Dan to carry out his threat was imminent, therefore, Al could argue that in self-defense
he loaded the cartridge & shot toward Dan. Al could argue that a person is lawfully entitled
to use that force which is necessary to defend oneself against an aggressor & deadly force
if it is reasonable to believe it is necessary in self[-]defense – is justified. Al could argue
that he believed Dan was crazy & going to kill him & that he was acting in self[-]defense.
The state could argue that Dan was the victim of a felony – that under the doctrine of
felony murder (a death that occurs during the commission of a felony, the defendant is
found guilty of murder) – and hold Al liable for his death. The felony has to be one that is
not inherently dangerous, and is separate from the death. Al, it could be argued, did go
to Dan’s shop with the specific intent of taking the gun & ammo by deceit & obtaining title
(false pretenses)[,] therefore in the commission of this felony he would be liable for any
deaths resulting thereof. Dan was killed – he was a victim. If Al cannot prove that Dan
was a threat to him, Al may be found guilty of felony murder[.] If Al is not found guilty of
larceny he could be found guilty of murder. Murder is the unlawful killing of another with
malice aforethought – reckless, wanton, an[d] malignant heart. If could be argued that
firing a shot at anyone who was not an immediate threat to one – in this case Dan had not
yet fired at Al – therefore, Al’s firing a shot toward Dan, it would be reasonably foreseeable
that the bullet would hit Dan & Al’s recklessness may be grounds for successful charges
of murder. The state could try to also argue that Al specifically intended to kill Dan, in that
he premeditated the killing – he had time to think & to load the gun. Al could counter that
he was acting in self-defense, and was reasonably justified to use that force he believed
-5-
was necessary under the circumstances to defend himself. This could mitigate the charge
to voluntary manslaughter acting in the heat of passion, or to involuntary manslaughter –
reckless conduct likely to cause death – or reckless disregard of consequences. If it can
be found Al acted with specific intent to deprive Dan of property, he may be found guilty
of felony murder. If not, then he may be justified in using a self-defense justification to
mitigate his charges to manslaughter or to dismiss his charges.
-6-
Answer B to Question 1
I. - Dan - Justification of Actions
A. Pursuing Al - Dan[‘]s justification(s) for pursing Al require review of the
relationship and standards for Dan[.]
1.) Shopkeeper - Dan as a shopkeeper has a valid use of reasonable
force and detention of Al if Dan reasonably believed that Al had stolen
goods from the store. The fact that Al grabbed the bag and fled the
store when he was confronted about the counterfeit money makes
this a reasonable assumption[.]
2.) Owner - Recovery of personal property - Regardless of shopkeeper
rule, Dan had the right to timely use reasonable force to recover his
personal property which had been stolen by Al. He had the right to
pursue Al a reasonable distance in this recovery pursuit.
A. Chasing with a loaded gun — Dan would need to show
that taking a loaded gun in his pursuit was a reasonable
action. The fact that — Al had stolen a gun and the
ammunition may not be sufficient for this showing. The
gun was not loaded and this could be a turning point as
to reasonableness[.]
3.) Felony Prevention - If Al’s action was to be considered a felony, then
Dan could act as private citizen [sic] acting to prevent the commission
of a felony as well as the two other standards.
4.) Greater Evil - If Al can show that his actions were reasonably
necessary to prevent the greater evil that Dan presented with the
stolen gun & ammo, then his actions would also be justified[.]
II. Dan - Use of Threat of Deadly Force
A. - Reasonableness -
1.) Did Dan have reason to believe the use of threat of deadly force was
reasonable? If Al’s stealing the gun & ammunition gave rise to a
felony situation & Dan reasonably believed such threat of force was
necessary then he should be justified in using this threat[.]
2.) Danger to Others - It may also be argued against Dan that his firing
in the air was reckless and unjustified in the threat of danger to
-7-
others.
B.) Felony - (see I a 3)
Use of threat of deadly force would be justified if reasonable to
prevent felony.
III. Crimes of Al
A.) Murder - For Al to be charged with murder he must be found to have
committed a homicide with malice.
1.) Homicide - Homicide is defined as the killing of a person by another
— Here the facts clearly show that Al turned and shot at Dan[,]
causing his death[.]
2.) Malice - Malice can be determined by one of four factors 1) intent to
kill, 2) intent to cause serious bodily harm, 3) reckless and wanton
behavior (depraved heart) 4) in the commission of an inherently
dangerous felony.
a. Intent to Kill - Deadly weapon use absent any evidence to the
contrary is sufficient to show intent. Al loading & shooting
does this.
b. Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Harm -
It is clear that Al intended some harm even if he can show his
intent was not to kill[.]
c. Reckless & Wanton - Al[‘]s firing of gun in the street in any
direction should show reckless & wanton behavior[.]
d. Felony Murder - Was Al’s action causing Dan[’]s death in the
course of a felony? If it can be shown that Al’s action was
inherently dangerous and the taking of the gun and
ammunition in conjunction with the passing of counterfeit
money satisfied the felony portion then Al would fall under the
felony murder rule as well.
It seems on the facts that Al would be charged with first degree murder unless he
could somehow mitigate the charge.
DEFENSES
1. Self[-]Defense - Al can raise the issue of self[-]defense because Dan
-8-
threatened to shoot him. However, self-defense is not viable in the
commission of this act. Al had other options to remove this threat that did
not require his use of deadly force (i.e. surrender).
2. Heat of Passion - Al may claim that he acted in the heat of the moment and
not in a clear state of mind to try to mitigate to Voluntary Manslaughter[.]
3. Inadequate Defense -
All may have some other reason or justification allowing him to claim his
action was based on behalf of facts not mentioned that led him to act in the
manner he did[.]
4. Mental State - Because of intent requirement if Al could show an inability to
form the intent he could then reduce the murder charge[.]
B.) Larceny - Trespassory taking of the property of another with intent to deprive
1. Taking - While Dan had placed the gun & ammo in a bag and placed
it on the counter, it seems clear that as the money had not been fully
exchanged - Al’s grabbing would be a taking.
2. Intent - Al’s use of counterfeit money and subsequent flight would
indicate an intent to take the gun & ammo by trick if not directly. It
would likely be argued that he formed the intent at the time he was
confronted if not before.
3. His fleeing the store with the items clearly shows his depriving Dan of
those items.
Defenses -
C.) Attempted Larceny by Trick
1.) Al misrepresented the money as genuine in tendering same to Dan
in exchange for the gun.
2.) Intent - His entering & using the counterfeit would seem to indicate his
intent, particularly when coupled with his subsequent taking & fleeing
when confronted[.]
Defenses
Mistake - Al might try to argue that he did not know that the money
was counterfeit, but his actions & lack of other facts make this
-8-
unlikely[.]
D.) [sic]
-9-
Question 2
Seller inherited a collection of antique dolls from her aunt. In her aunt’s estate, the
collection had been valued at $15,000. On September 1, Seller wrote, signed, and sent
the following letter to several well-known doll collectors in her area:
Dear Doll Collector:
I now own a collection of antique dolls that I’m
willing to sell for $15,000 to the first person who lets
me know he or she wants the collection. This offer
will be good for 30 days. If you want to inspect the
dolls, I’ll be happy to make an appointment. Phone
me at 555-1765.
Seller
On September 3, Buyer, who was familiar with the collection, received the letter and
immediately called Seller to arrange to inspect the dolls on the same day. Buyer appeared
at Seller’s home and inspected and photographed the dolls. She told Seller, “I’m interested,
but I want to do some research. I’ll get back to you.” Seller said, “Okay, but my letter went
out to a number of other people. I’m selling to the first one I actually hear from who wants
to buy the entire collection.”
On September 4, Buyer took the photographs to an expert doll appraiser and paid the
appraiser $1,000 to evaluate and authenticate the collection. The appraiser told Buyer the
dolls were authentic and worth at least $30,000. Buyer immediately phoned Seller, who
was not at home. Buyer left a message on Seller’s telephone answering machine saying,
“This is Buyer. I like the dolls. Please call me at 555-8876 when you get home.” Also on
September 4, and just to be doubly sure, Buyer wrote and signed a letter to Seller stating,
“I accept your offer to sell your doll collection for $15,000. Buyer,” and deposited the letter
in the mail at the Post Office.
Soon after Buyer returned home from depositing the letter at the Post Office, she received
a phone call from Seller. Seller said, “I got your voice mail message. However, I just want
to let you know that I’ve had an appraisal made of the collection, and I’m not willing to let
it go for less than $35,000.” Buyer responded, “You can’t do that. I accepted your offer of
$15,000, so you have to sell it to me for $15,000.”
Was an enforceable contract formed binding Seller to sell the doll collection to Buyer for
$15,000? Discuss.
-10-
Answer A to Question 2
2)
Buyer v. Seller
UCC v. Common Law
A contract for the sale of goods will be governed by the UCC.
Since the dolls for which the parties are contracting are tangible, movable, and fully
identified in the contract, they are goods as defined by the UCC, and the contract will be
under the UCC.
Merchants
One who deals regularly with the goods involved in the transaction, or who otherwise holds
himself out as having special knowledge or skill with the goods.
Although seller is selling to professional buyers, she does not deal regularly in dolls.
Therefore, she is not a merchant under the UCC.
Buyer, as a well-known collector, was one who dealt regularly with dolls and who held
herself out as having special knowledge and skill with dolls. Therefore, she is a merchant
under the UCC and will be held to a heightened standard of good faith and fair dealing.
Offer
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is definite in terms and which
is communicated to the offeree.
The letter by Seller mentioned the following terms:
Subject: Doll collection
Quantity: One
Price: $15,000
Parties: Although no specific party is mentioned, the offer is for the first offeree to respond
to the offer.
Time: There is no time specified, so a reasonable time will be implied by the UCC.
Therefore, the communication has sufficiently definite terms for a UCC offer.
Furthermore, the language “I’m willing to sell” shows that there was an intent to be bound
on the part of Seller.
-11-
Moreover, the fact that Buyer received the offer shows that it was effectively
communicated.
Therefore, there is a valid offer under the UCC.
Merchant’s Firm Offer Rule
Where a merchant promises to hold an offer open in a signed writing, the offer will be held
open for the specified time.
The offer by Seller promised that it would be good for 30 days. Buyer will argue that since
the offer was written and signed by Seller, it falls under the merchant’s firm offer rule and
must be held open.
However, as discussed above, Seller is not a merchant. Therefore, the merchant’s firm
offer rule will not apply, and the offer is freely revocable by Seller.
Rejection
Where an offeree rejects an offer.
When Buyer had inspected the dolls and said she wanted to do some research, it could
be argued that she had rejected the offer. However, there is no indication that she
intended to reject, and her language indicated her intent to have the offer remain open for
possible acceptance at a later time. Therefore, there has been no rejection of the offer by
Buyer.
Acceptance
An outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
When Buyer left a message on Seller’s phone, saying that she liked the dolls, she will
argue that she accepted Seller’s offer. However, her language was not unequivocal
assent, since she said nothing about buying the dolls. It would have been reasonable for
Seller to assume that she wanted to inspect the dolls again. Therefore, the phone
message was not an acceptance.
Acceptance #2
An outward manifiestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
When Buyer mailed her letter stating “I accept” your offer, she showed her unequivocal
assent to Seller’s offer.
-12-
Normally, acceptances are valid upon dispatch based on the mailbox rule. However,
Seller’s offer expressly stated that acceptance would only be valid upon receipt, because
she would sell to the first collector who “let her know” of their willingness to buy, not the first
who mailed an acceptance. Therefore, the acceptance will probably be valid only when
received by Seller.
Revocation
An offeree’s revocation of his offer.
When Seller phoned Buyer and said, “I’m not willing to sell for less that [sic] $35,000", she
made a statement inconsistent with the offer remaining open, and thus showed her intent
to revoke her offer. Since she had not received the letter from Seller[sic], the offer had not
been accepted and the revocation occurred before acceptance. Therefore, there was a
valid revocation.
Detrimental Reliance on Offer rule
Where an offeror makes an offer which he should reasonably foresee to induce reliance
on the part of the offeree, the offeree will be held open for a reasonable time to prevent
injustice.
Seller will argue that she detrimentally relied on Seller’s offer by appraising the dolls for
$1000. Moreover, she will claim that this was foreseeable, because she told buyer that she
would be researching the dolls.
However, Seller will claim that “doing research” does not foreseeably include paying
thousands of dollars for evaluations. Therefore, this argument will likely fail and Seller’s
revocation will be effective.
Since Seller’s offer was revoked, there is no enforceable contract.
If a court should find that Seller’s acceptance was effective, the parties will proceed as
follows:
Consideration
A bargained-for exchange of legal value, involving both benefit and detriment to both
parties.
The contract called for the exchange of dolls for money. Since both parties incur detriment
under the contract, there is valid consideration.
-13-
Defenses:
Statute of Frauds
A contract for the sale of goods of $500 or more must have a writing.
Seller will argue that since the contract was for the sale of goods of $500 or more, it must
be in writing. However, since there is a writing signed by the party to be charged (seller),
there is sufficient memorandum for the contract.
Moreover, Buyer could argue that by paying the appraiser she detrimentally relied on the
contract, which may take it out of the statute under the UCC. However, since this occurred
before acceptance, it was not reliance on the contract and this argument will fail.
Unconscionability
Seller may claim that by trying to enforce a contract to sell the dolls at half their value,
Buyer was acting unconscionably. However, this is probably not a sufficient discrepancy
in price for unconscionability to apply. Therefore, this defense will fail.
Unilateral Mistake
Seller will argue that there was a unilateral mistake as to the value of the dolls. Since
Buyer knew about the mistake, her acceptance of the contract was in bad faith.
However, the contract was made on Seller’s terms, and a court will probably hold it to be
a mistake in judgment. Therefore, this defense will probably not apply.
Anticipatory Breach
Where a party, by his words, indicates his unequvocal intent to breach the contract.
When Seller said to buyer, “I’m not willing to sell for less than $35,000", Seller showed her
intent to breach the contract by failing to perform her duty. Therefore, seller [sic] can sue
immediately for breach of contract, and need not hold herself ready to perform.
Remedies:
Specific Performances:
Seller will probably argue that the goods were unique goods, since they were collector’s
items, and ask the court for specific performance. Since Seller still has the goods, a court
will probably agree and give specific performance to Buyer.
-14-
General Damages:
If specific performance is not granted, Buyer may argue for expectation damages for her
reasonable expectation under the contract. However, she will probably not get these as
they are not the usual UCC remedy.
Reliance Damages:
Seller will probably collect compensation for the $1000 that she paid for appraisal in
reliance on the contract, if this reliance was foreseeable.
Incidental Damages:
Seller will also collect the costs of bringing suit and getting specific performance.
-15-
Answer B to Question 2
2)
WHAT LAW GOVERNS?
Contracts for the sale of goods are governed by the UCC. Goods are movable, tangible
property.
Here the facts involve the potential sale of a set of antique dolls. Dolls are movable,
tangible property.
Therefore, these facts will be governed by the UCC[.]
WERE THE PARTIES MERCHANTS?
Under the UCC, merchants are held to special rules governing the formation and
enforcement of contracts. Merchants are those who regularly deal in the kind of goods in
question or who hold themselves out [h]as having some special skill or knowledge as to
the particular goods.
Here, Seller simply inherited a collection of antique dolls from her aunt. No facts suggest
she had any prior knowledge or dealing with dolls and her apparent undervaluing of the
dolls would support this inference. However, she sent a letter to “several well-known doll
collectors in her area,” one of whom was Buyer.
Therefore, while Seller is not a merchant, Buyer is.
CONTRACT
A contract is a promise or set of promises which the law will enforce and for the breach of
which a remedy is available. A contract consists of an offer, acceptance, consideration
and lack of defenses to formation and enforcement.
WAS THERE A VALID OFFER?
An offer is a present commitment to enter into an agreement communicated to an
identifiable offeree and containing definite and certain terms.
SELLER’S LETTER OF SEPT. 1:
Seller’s letter indicates a commitment to enter into an agreement to sell the dolls for
$15,000. It is communicated to a number of well-known doll collectors, though it specifies
that it can only be accepted by “the first person who lets [Seller] know he or she wants the
-16-
collection.” By indicating that the offer, though sent to several individuals, is extended only
on a “first-come, first-served” bases[sic]” Seller has communicated that the letter is, in fact,
an offer, rather than simply an invitation to negotiate further (such as an advertisement).
To be sufficiently definite, the UCC requires that the offer state the quantity and subject
matter of the offer. Although “a collection” does not state a specific number, it is likely that
this number would be known to doll collectors who would be familiar with the custom of the
trade. Moreover, at common law, an offer is sufficiently definite when its terms can be
determined for the purpose of establishing when a breach has occurred and what remedy
would be available. Therefore, even if it were not immediately apparent from the offer how
many dolls are included in a “collection,” it is something that could be established to a
reasonable degree of certainty sufficient for awarding a remedy in the event of breach. For
the purpose of analysis, we assume the offer was sufficiently definite, though see below
(PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL) in the event a court would find otherwise.
Therefore, it appears, at least provisionally, the Seller’[s] letter is a valid offer.
ACCEPTANCE?
Under UCC Sec. 2-206, an acceptance can made [sic] by any means reasonable under
the circumstances unless otherwise specified in the offer. Here, the offer indicates that an
interested buyer should contact Seller by phone at 555-1765. However, because of the
context, a reader might also construe the letter as instructing someone to call in the event
he/she wants to schedule an appointment to inspect the doll, in which case, any means
reasonably [sic] under the circumstances would suffice as a mode of acceptance.
Here Buyer did, in fact, contact Seller by phone to schedule an appointment. Having
inspected the dolls, however, Buyer said that she was interested but that she would need
to get back to Seller after having done some research. As distinct from a
rejection/counteroffer or an acceptance, Buyer’s communication would probably be
considered a communication of intent to continue negotiations. In any event, it is not an
assent to the terms of the offer, so that it will not serve as an acceptance.
On September 4, however, Buyer again telephoned Seller, this time leaving a voicemail
message indicating that she wished to accept the offer to purchase the dolls at $15,000.
She also wrote a letter “to be doubly sure” to lock in the price and to beat out her
competitors before they got to the dolls. Because Seller did not give any further or more
specific instructions about how she wished to have the offer accepted, the parties’ course
of dealing suggests that acceptance by telephone, or, in the absence of both parties, by
voicemail is an acceptable method of acceptance. The real issue here is timeliness rather
than method, so that the letter would probably be superfluous if not for the additional
problem of whether the statement “I like the dolls” is sufficiently unequivocal to
communicate Buyer’s acceptance. The letter indicates an unequivocal, so that if Buyer’s
acceptance by letter was timely, then her voicemail message is unnecessary.
-17-
TIMELINES OF ACCEPTANCE: MAILBOX RULES
Acceptance is effective upon dispatch.
Here Buyer deposited the letter in the mailbox.
Therefore, she accepted the offer, barring any exceptions to the Mailbox Rules.
EXCEPTIONS TO MAILBOX RULES; OPTION CONTRACTS/MERCHANT’S FIRM
OFFER
Acceptance of an option contract is effective upon receipt. A merchant’s firm offer is a
writing, signed by a merchant, that indicates that an offer will be held open for a reasonable
amount of time, not to exceed three months. Unlike a common law option contract, which
requires consideration or at least purported consideration, a merchant’s firm offer is valid,
even absent consideration.
Although Seller indicates that “the offer will be good for 30 days,” there is no apparent
consideration, not even purported consideration from Buyer, so that this cannot be
considered a traditional option contract. Additionally, as noted above, Seller is not a
merchant, so that her letter of September 1 cannot serve as a merchant’s firm offer.
Therefore, Buyer has accepted.
TIMELY REVOCATION?
An offer is freely revocable at any time prior to acceptance. Revocation is effective upon
receipt.
Here, Buyer deposited her acceptance in the mailbox and then returned home. Soon
thereafter, Seller called attempting to revoke the offer. Because Buyer had already
effectively accepted by mailing her letter before she received Seller’s attempted revocation,
Buyer’[s] acceptance controls.
CONSIDERATION
Legally sufficient, bargained-for exchange that constitutes a detriment to the promisee,
induces current performance and creates a binding obligation on both parties. A promise
for a promise is generally valid as consideration.
Here Seller indicated that she would sell a collection of antique dolls to the first person who
notified her of an interest in purchasing the collection for $15,000. Buyer, in turn, accepted
-18-
this offer on its terms by mailing a letter on September 4 in which she specifically mentions
the price, and thereby promises to pay the requested $15,000.
As a promise for a promise, there is valid consideration and, absent defenses to formation
or enforcement, a valid contract exists.
STATUTE OF FRAUDS
Certain contracts to be enforceable must be in writing and signed by the party to be
charged. Among these, the UCC requires that contracts for the sale of goods for $500 or
more be in writing and signed by the party to be charged.
Here, Seller would be the party trying to avoid the contract (the party to be charged). A
sufficient writing exists, however, because her September 1 letter states the necessary
terms of the agreement and was signed by Seller.
Therefore, the Statute of Frauds will not bar this contract from enforcement.
OTHER DEFENSES?
There are no facts to suggest that other defenses might apply, as both parties appear to
be competent adults dealing at arms[‘] length without overreaching or imposing oppressive
terms. Therefore, there do not appear to be any defense of incapacity, illegality,
unconscionability, mistake or misunderstanding. Seller’s stat[e]ment, “Okay, but my letter
went out to a number of other people. I’m selling to the first one I actually hear from who
wants to buy the entire collection,” does not rise to the leve[l] of duress, as it does not in
any way limit Buyer’s choices or hold over her any threat, other than the possibility that she
will not be able to obtain the dolls if she does not act soon to purchase them.
If, as noted above, a court should find that the offer itself was insufficiently definite, by
stating only “a collection” rather than a specific quantity, of dolls, then a valid contract
would not have been formed, though there may be an alternative theory for Buyer to
recover at least her expenditures for the appraiser.
PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL
Where the promisee reasonably, foreseeably and substantially relies to her detriment on
the promissor’s offer, the promise will be enforceable to the extent necessary to avoid
injustice.
Here because Buyer informed Seller that she intended to conduct further research,
arguably her $1000 is recoverable under a theory of promissory estoppel. It was both
reasonable and foreseeable that she might have expenses--indeed, Seller herself decided
to have the dolls appraised, indicating that it was not an unexpected or bizarre action to
-19-
take by one about to enter into an agreement for the sale or antique dolls. Additionally,
$1000 is a substantial outlay, so that, in the unlikely event that the custom and usage of
trade for antique doll collectors does not specify how many dolls are in a “collection,” Buyer
should at minimum be able to recover her $1000 under a promissory estoppel theory.
Question 3
Prof is a professor of torts and commercial law at University Law School (“ULS”). Prof’s
employment contract with ULS requires him to teach a certain number of hours, conduct
research, publish scholarly works, be available for consultation with his students, and
engage in community service.
Dave, one of Prof’s students and research assistants, applied for a summer job with the
State Office of Youth Assistance, an agency that houses and counsels troubled youths.
Dave asked Prof to write a letter of recommendation for him. Prof agreed and wrote a letter
recommending Dave highly and in unqualified terms. He sent the letter to the Office of
Youth Assistance in a sealed envelope marked “Confidential.”
Prof knew that the job for which Dave had applied required the incumbents to be in frequent
close and unsupervised contact with young children. Prof also knew at the time he wrote
the letter that Dave had admitted during a confidential disciplinary investigation by ULS that
he had molested his girlfriend’s young daughter and that Dave was undergoing counseling
related to the incident. Prof did not mention anything about this in the letter because he did
not want to hurt Dave’s chances of getting the job and because he was convinced that
Dave would not repeat his conduct.
Dave was hired by the Office of Youth Assistance. Toward the end of the summer, while
conducting a private interview with a six-year-old girl, Dave succumbed to temptation and
attempted to molest her. The girl’s screams attracted the attention of Gina, a youth
counselor working nearby. Gina ran to the rescue, but the stress of the situation caused
Gina to suffer a debilitating heart attack.
Gina sues Prof and ULS for negligent misrepresentation, alleging that Prof is liable because
of his neglect in failing to disclose what he knew about Dave in his letter of
recommendation and that ULS is liable under the doctrine of respondeat superior.
Prof moves to dismiss Gina’s suit on the grounds that (i) he owed no duty of care to Gina
to disclose what he knew about Dave and (ii) even if did have such a duty, his breach of
the duty was not the proximate cause of Gina’s injuries.
ULS moves to dismiss Gina’s suit on the ground that ULS cannot be held vicariously liable
because writing letters of recommendations for his students was outside the scope of Prof’s
employment duties as a professor.
How would a court be likely to rule on each ground of the motions filed by Prof and ULS to
-20-
dismiss Gina’s suit? Discuss.
Answer A to Question 3
3)
Question 3 Torts
Negligent misrepresentation
Misrepresentation is the false assertion of past/present material fact, made with
unreasonable conduct (negligence), causing reliance, upon which misrepresentation the
plaintiff does justifiably rely, and the plaintiff suffers damages as a proximate result.
Negligent misrepresentation occurs when there is a duty to disclose or some relationship
between P and D which incurs liability towards the plaintiff. Here, it could be said that
although scienter and intent to induce reliance may not have been present, the elements
for negligent misrep are present if the D’s conduct fell below the appropriate standard of
care. By representing Dave to be such an upstanding individual, D made a false assertion
of past/present material fact, which D should have known would cause justifiable reliance
upon the statement.
G v. Prof
Negligent misrepresentation results from the unreasonable conduct of D, which imposes
an unreasonable risk of harm upon others, and which causes actual harm or injury to
others as a proximate result of the D’s negligence.
DUTY
When D acts affirmatively, D owes a duty of care to all foreseeable P’s within the zone of
danger. D has the responsibility and duty to act as an ordinary prudent person, and to
refrain from acting in ways that impose risks of harm upon others. Here, D [P]rof acted
affirmatively when he wrote a letter of recommendation for Dave. The real question is
whether G can be considered a foreseeable P. The more obvious foreseeable P’s to D’s
conduct were employers of Dave and the children with whom Dave would come into
contact. However, as well known in tort law, danger does invite rescue and since G was
not only a youth counselor, but a rescuer as well, rescuers are foreseeable plaintiffs.
Therefore, G was a foreseeable plaintiff since she was a rescuer.
In addition, Prof was under contract with ULS to do certain things within his job description.
These activities affected more people involved than just the other contracting party, (ULS),
-21-
and therefore, arising out of this contractual duty, a duty arose to all those affected by his
assigned duties on the job.
STANDARD OF CARE
The applicable standard of care is that of an ordinary prudent person in same or similar
circumstances. Here, D was a university professor who had basically the same duties as
others with the same title. Here, as the writer of a recommendation letter for a student, D
was required to act in the capacity of a reasonable person when doing so.
BREACH OF DUTY
FAILURE TO DISCLOSE
Breach is established when the D’s conduct is unreasonable. Unreasonableness is
determined by a balancing method, which weighs the social utility of the D’s conduct and
the burden of reducing/eliminating the harm against the probability and gravity of the harm
imposed by the conduct. Otherwise known as the Learned Hand Formula, D is liable is
B#PL. Here, D’s conduct may have been unreasonable since he personally had
knowledge of the job description of Dave and knew that Dave would be in close
unsupervised contact with young children. D also knew that Dave had admitted to
molesting another young child. D acted unreasonably when he failed to include this
information in the recommendation letter. Even if he did not want to clearly repeat Dave’s
history to the new employer, D could have abstained from writing such a glowing
recommendation which recommended Dave in unqualified terms. Any reasonable person
would probably have been reluctant to dismiss Dave’s history, and would have been more
objective in the letter.
D will counter that he did not breach his duty because he did not believe his conduct was
unreasonable. D will claim that he was “convinced” that Dave would not repeat his conduct
and was undergoing counseling related to the incident. D will claim that he was only trying
to help Dave and did not want to hurt Dave’s chances of getting the job. However, D
imposed an unreasonable risk of harm upon the children coming into contact with Dave
and upon rescuers (since they are foreseeable) because of D’s unreasonable conduct.
CAUSATION
ACTUAL CAUSE
BUT FOR “sine qua non”/SUBSTANTIAL FACTOR
A cause is an actual cause of the harm if “but for” the D’s conduct, the harm to P would not
have occurred. Here, D negligently misrepresented Dave’s character, and this would be
an actual cause of G’s harm if but for D’s conduct, the harm to G would not have occurred.
Here, had D not been negligent, D would not have been hired, would not have attempted
to molest the child, and the G’s rescue would not have occurred. Therefore, but for D’s
-22-
conduct, the harm to G would not have occurred.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
INTERVENING/SUPERSEDING
WAS DAVE’S ATTEMPT TO MOLEST AGAIN A SUPERSEDING EVENT?
FORESEEABLE CRIMINAL ACT
Proximate cause determines if the actual cause is sufficient to hold the D responsible for
the P’s harm. It determines whether intervening events break the chain of causation, and
whether the resulting harm was a foreseeable consequence of D’s conduct. An event is
considered intervening if it occurs after the D’s conduct occurs, but before the resulting
harm. Here, D wrote a glowing recommendation, causing Dave to be hired. It was
foreseeable that he would be hired after such a glowing recommendation letter.
Considering Dave’s history (and regardless of D’s personal opinion that Dave would not
molest again), it was foreseeable that he would succumb to temptation when around young
children. G ran to the rescue of the young girl because of her screams. The girl’s screams
were a foreseeable result of Dave’s attempt to molest her, and anyone coming to the
rescue was also foreseeable because danger does invite rescue.
Furthermore, the ordinary negligence of rescuers is foreseeable, but rescuers’ gross
negligence, criminal acts of 3rd persons, and unforeseeable acts of God are unforeseeable.
Here, the facts do not indicate that Gina was even ordinarily negligent. All that happened
was that the stress of the situation caused her to suffer a heart attack. Again, it is
foreseeable that one would be alarmed at hearing a young girl screaming.
THIN-SKULL/EGGSHELL PLAINTIFF
D [P]rof will try to establish that G’s sensitive condition was pre-existing and sufficient to
break the chain of causation. D is unlikely to succeed with this argument because the D
must take the P as he finds her. Therefore, any prior condition of Gina’s health will be
irrelevant and the fact that her condition (if any) was aggravated would not break the chain
of causation. D will be held liable for G’s harm as long as it was foreseeable that D’s
negligent misrepresentation was a proximate cause of the harm.
DAMAGES
In negligence actions, the P may recover harm for actual damage in the form of personal
injury/property damage, as long as that harm is quantifiable and reasonably ascertainable.
Purely economic loss is not recoverable unless parasitic to personal injury/property
damage. Here, G could recover for her pain/suffering, loss of wages, medical bills, etc.
-23-
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
In jurisdictions adopting contrib negl, it is complete bar to recovery if the P’s conduct falls
below the reasonable standard of care which one should hold for himself. Here, there are
no facts to suggest that G was contrib negl.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
The majority of jurisdictions nowadays have adopted comparative fault in place of contrib
negl. In compa[ra]tive fault, the P’s recovery is reduced in proportion to the amount of
harm attributable to his own negligence.
PURE V[.] MODIFIED
Pure comp negl allows the P to recover even if she was more negligent that [sic] D. In
modified comp negl jurisdictions, the P’s recovery is barred if the P was more than 50% at
fault as compared to D.
Again, there are no facts to suggest that G’s recovery will be barred due to comp neg.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
ATR occurs where the P voluntarily elects to encounter a known understood risk of harm.
D may counter that G was aware of the gravity of the situation when she heard the child’s
screams and[,] therefore, knew of the risk and voluntarily elected to encou[n]ter it.
However, G will argue that just running to someone’s rescue does not mean that G knew
of the risk involved and that she would suffer a heart attack due to the stress. It is unlikely
that D will have a successful defense against G.
G v[.]ULS
RESPONDEAT SUPERIOR
This doctrine imposes vicarious liability in several relationships, particularly employeremployee,
as we have here. When an employee is acting within the scope/course of
employment, his emp[l]oyer can be vicariously liable for all tortious acts committed in
furtherance of the employment. Here, ULS is the employer who has hired Prof. Therefore,
the employer-employee relationship is established.
COURSE/SCOPE OF EMPLOYMENT
Determining whether D’s conduct was within the scope of employment will depend upon
the similarity of his conduct with the description of his assigned duties. ULS required Prof
to “be available for consultation with his students,” and “engage in community service.” It
-24-
seems foreseeable that a professor would write a letter of recommendation for a student,
and especially for a research assistant (who probably had more contact with [P]rof than the
other students). Therefore, D’s conduct was close enough to his assigned duties/job
description to be considered within the course/scope of employment. Furthermore, since
Dave was more than just a student, his status of being on[e] of [P]rof’s research assistants,
made it likely that [P]rof would write such a letter.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Based on the information provided as to D’s assigned duties towards ULS, it seems a
foreseeable result of being employed at ULS that D would write letters of recommendation
for his students. After all, “conducting research” is one of the assigned duties, and it
seems natural that a professor engaging in research would need student help in the form
of research assistants. Further, it does not break the chain of causation that he would
write letters of recommendation for his students.
SUPERSEDING CAUSE - UNFORESEEABLE CRIMINAL ACT OF 3RD PERSON
However, the fact that Dave was no ordinary research assistant/student, but was actually
a child molestor[,] may be sufficient to constitute an intervening cause, sufficient to break
the chain of causation. An event will be superseding if it is unforeseeable, independent,
and sufficient to break the chain of causation. So, since the criminal act of Dave was
unforeseeable to ULS, then ULS would not be vicariously liable for the acts of professor.
-25-
Answer B to Question 3
3)
Prof’s Motions for Dismissal
I. Negligent misrepresen[t]ation
The prima facie case for negligent misrepresentation requires that the the [sic]
misrepresentation be one of fact in which the Defendant was negligent in not discovering
the truth and which the Plaintiff reasonably and foreseeably relied upon the
misrepresentation and [,] such reliance was the actual and proximate cause of his injuries.
All cases for negligence, including negligent misrepresentation, requires [sic] the defendant
show a duty, a breach of that duty, that the breach was the actual and proximate cause of
the plaintiff’s injuries and that the plaintiff suffered injury resulting from the breach and that
the defendant has no valid defenses. Here, Prof’s motions to dismiss focus on the duty
element, claiming essentially that he owed no duty to Gina and proximate cause issues
claiming essentially that unforeseeable intervening events breaks [sic] the chain of events
from his act of writing the letter and Gina’s heart attack.
I. Duty
A duty is a legal obligation to conform one’s conduct to a recognized standard of
care to avoid unreasonable risks to foreseeable plaintiffs. Generally, when one commits
an affirmative act, he owes a standard of reasonable care to all people who might be
injured by that act. Here, Prof wrote a letter of recommendation to the State Office of
Youth Assistance (SOYA) recommending Dave. With this affirmative act, he owes a duty
to anyone who might be foreseeably injured by this harm.
A. Foreseeable plaintiffs. In the Palsgraf case, the Andrews opinion holds that
anyone who commits an affirmative act owes a duty to anyone who is harmed by that act.
However, the current majority - the Cardozo opinion, holds that the duty flows only to those
who are foreseeably harmed by the act. The specific tort being alleged here, negligent
misrepresentation, generally require[s] a fiduciary duty and the duty flows only to those who
might foreseeably be harmed by the misrepresentation. For example, an accountant who
negligently misrepresents a company’s books might be liable to the company’s
stockholders who foreseeably relied on those numbers. Or, as here, if SOYA relied upon
his letter and were sued by the child[‘]s parents, they might have a cause of action against
Prof. However, Gina is the one suing Prof and Prof will argue that because he has no
fiduciary duty to Gina and because she is not a foreseeable Plaintiff for injuries caused by
his writing a letter to SOYA he has no duty to conform his actions for her protection.
-26-
II. Proximate Cause
The Defendant’s actions must be both the actual and proximate (legal) cause of the
Plaintiff’s injuries. Proximate cause issues are properly raised when the alleged negligent
conduct is remote in time or place from the injures caused by that conduct. Here, the
allegedly negligent conduct was Prof’s writing of the letter recommending Dave for a
position working with children knowing that Dave had a history of misconduct working with
child. The injury is a heart attack and analysis of proximate cause revolves around
foreseeability. The foreseeability of the plaintiff is discussed above, under duty. Here, we
discuss the foreseeable type and extent of harm.
1. Intervening causes? The letter did not cause the heart attack; seeing Dave
molesting the young girl caused the heart attack. Dave’s molestation is criminal act and
generally a criminal act will break the chain of causation. The exception to this is when the
negligent act increases the likelihood or creates the conditions for the criminal act. Gina
will argue that writing the letter put Dave in a position to accomplish the criminal act and
therefore the criminal act should not break the chain of causation. In fact, Gina will argue
that because Prof knew of Dave’s previous molestations, the criminal act was actually
foreseeable. However, Prof will argue that Dave was in counseling and that the letter, if
negligent at all, only provided an incentive for hiring. There is nothing in these facts to
show that the SOYA relied upon Prof’s letter. We are told Prof wrote it and Dave was
hired. Prof will argue that, according to these facts, his letter was not the cause of Dave
being placed in position to molest the girl. It may have been[,] at most, a contributing
factor[,] but the facts do not describe any specific reliance by SOYA on the letter.
2. Foreseeable type of harm? Negligently representing a child molester in
“unqualified terms” in a letter does not foreseeably result in a heart attack for a coworker
of the child molester. Prof will argue that the foreseeable type of harm resulting from this
conduct is that a child would possibly be molested but not that someone will have a heart
attack. However, the foreseeable harm did actually occur - a child was molested. Gina
heard the child scream and, as is often put, “danger invites rescue”. Gina ran to the
scream, thinking a child was in danger and when she saw the danger suffered foreseeable
harm from seeing a child being molested - specifically, she suffered stress and an ensuing
heart attack. Thus, although the heart attack is not a directly foreseeable type of harm
resulting from a negligent misrepresentation, the chain of causation is from the letter, to
the hiring, to the molestation, to the rescue, to the heart attack. Gina will argue that each
item in that chain was foreseeable and nothing intervened to break this chain (see above
for whether Dave’s criminal conduct serves as an intervening cause).
3. Foreseeable extent of harm? Under the current majority, if the type of harm is
foreseeable, Prof will be liable for the full extent of the harm.
The court will likely rule Prof owed Gina no fiduciary duty and owed Gina no duty as she
was not a foreseeable Plaintiff. Furthermore, the chain of causation is stretched extremely
-27-
thin and the act of writing the letter and the eventual injury of a heart attack is tenuous, only
connected by the fact that the heart attack was induced by rescue.
ULS Motions for Dismissal
ULS is being joined in this suit as a codefendant under the doctrine of respondeat superior
which imposes liability on the employer for the torts committed during the course of and
in the scope of their employment. ULS has motioned for dismissal claiming that the Prof,
even if he was negligent in writing the letter, did so on his own - letters of recommendation
are not in the scope of his employment for ULS.
I. Not in scope of employment. We are told that the ULS-Prof employment contract
requires Prof to teach, research, publish, perform community service and be available for
consultation with his students. ULS is correct when the[y] say that writing letters is not part
of the employment contract[,] however Gina will argue that it is [a] foreseeable part of the
employment that Prof, who teaches and consults with students, will write letters of
recommendation for students. In fact, she will be able to show that this is a very common
occurrence and is in fact highly foreseeable. If she can show that part of consulting with
students and working with students and grading students is also writing letters of
recommendation, she can include Prof’s conduct in the scope of employment which will
impute liability to ULS on the basis of RS. She can also argue that if ULS did not want
teachers to write these letters, they could easily have prohibited it. However, they did not
and therefore should be liable for the foreseeable actions of their employees.
If Prof is found liable, the court will likely rule that ULS is liable under respondeat superior
as writing letters of recommendation is a foreseeable activity within the scope of
employment of a law professor.
-28-
Question 4
Dan intensely disliked his co-worker, Mona, with whom he was in direct competition for an
important promotion at work. He knew that Mona and her husband, Otto, had a troubled
marriage and that Otto suspected Mona of infidelity. He also knew that Otto had a very bad
temper when provoked.
Hoping secretly that it would provoke Otto to kill Mona, Dan told Otto that he had seen
Mona and another co-worker in a compromising position in the storeroom on several
occasions. Believing what Dan told him, Otto went to Mona’s workplace and hid in the
storeroom. As he waited, he became angrier and angrier with each passing moment.
When Mona entered to get some supplies, Otto jumped out from behind a cabinet, flew into
an uncontrollable rage, yelled “Dan has told me what you do when you come in here. I’m
going to kill you,” and began to strangle her. Mona’s screams attracted a security guard,
who subdued Otto and freed Mona.
Dan and Otto have each been charged with solicitation of murder, conspiracy to commit
murder, and attempted murder.
Do the facts support each of the charges against Dan and Otto, and what, if any, defenses
might they each assert? Discuss.
-29-
Answer A to Question 4
4)
People v. Dan
Solicitation of Murder. Solicitation is asking another to do an illegal act. Where the target
(intended) crime requires a certain result (such as murder requires a homicide), the actor
must desire that the result occur. While Dan (D) may have secretly hoped a murder would
occur, he has not asked Otto (O) to kill Mona (M), or anyone for that matter. He has also
not asked anyone to do anything illegal. Rather, D has provided O with information that
he hopes will lead to M’s death. This will bear on his liability for attempted murder.
However, D has not committed the crime of solicitation of murder.
0 Merger. A successful solicitation merges into the crime of conspiracy. Here, there
was no solicitation, so there was nothing to merge.
0 0
Conspiracy to Commit Murder. Conspiracy is an agreement between two or more parties
to do an illegal act, or to do a legal act by illegal means. The majority of modern
jurisdictions also require a minimal overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. Again, as
above, D and O have not agreed to do anything. D gave O information that he hoped O
would act on, but his true intentions were secret and there was no agreement between D
and O to kill M, or anyone, or to do anything illegal. Therefore, D is not guilty of conspiracy
to commit murder.
Attempted Murder. Attempt is the intent to do an illegal act, or bring about an illegal result,
plus an act in furtherance of that intent. The target crime involved in attempted murder is,
of course, murder, to be discussed infra. Here, the state will argue that D attempted to
murder M.
0 Specific Intent Crimes. Because attempt requires the intent to do an illegal act or
bring about an illegal result, general intent crimes (as some types of murder are) cannot
be the subject of malice. Specific intent crimes - those in which the actor intends his result
can be the subject of an intent crime. Crimes requiring a knowing mental state can be the
subject of attempt if the actor could be substantially certain that the illegal act or result
would occur.
0 Act In Furtherance. Traditionally, the act must have been in close proximity to the
target crime. The Modern Penal Code (MPC) requires that the act be a substantial step
toward completion of the target crime; an act is not a substantial step unless it is strongly
corroborative of the actor’s criminal intent. Here, D has undertaken an act in furtherance
of his intent that M be murdered by setting in motion a chain of events which he hoped
(secretly, of course) would lead to O’s killing of M. Telling O, who[m] he knew had a very
-30-
bad temper when provoked, something as provocative as the fact that he’d caught M in
compromising positions with another person[,] constitutes a substantial step toward her
killing and is in close proximity to her actual killing.
0 0 Use of Instrumentation. As a defense, D may attempt to argue that he did
not intend to kill M, rather, only O did. D would argue that he simply gave O some
information and that O was the “only” prospective murderer. In this case, however, O can
be viewed as an instrumentality who, while human, is truly little different that [sic] an
inanimate weapon such as a gun. Where one loads a gun and fires it at another,
substantially certain that firing the gun will kill the intended victim, D “loaded” O with
information that he hoped, and was substantially certain would, inflame the temperamental
O to the point where he would kill M, or at least attempt to. Consequently, D clearly did
undertake an act that was intended to result in M’s murder.
0 0 Target Crime: Murder. Murder is an unlawful homicide, committed with
malice.
0 0 Homicide. Homicide is the killing of anther live human being. Had the target
crime been completed, Mona would have been killed, as D desired. Thus, the homicide
element is satisfied for attempted murder.
0 Malice. Malice can be satisfied through any of the following four manners: intent to
kill, intent to do serious bodily harm, depraved heart and felony murder. Only one type of
malice is relevant to this discussion:
0 0 Intent to Kill. Where the actor, intending to kill his victim, does so, this will be
the appropriate charge. In this case, we are specifically told that D secretly hoped that O
would kill M. The fact that his intent was secret is immaterial. The fact that D intended that
M be killed as a result of his actions with regard to O is all that is needed to satisfy this
element. Had O killed M, D would have been criminally liable for intent to kill murder.
Because O did not kill M - and even if O had not acted on D’s intentions, this would be the
case - the malice element of the target crime is satisfied. Intent to kill being, by definition,
a specific intent crime, it can be the subject of a charge of attempt.
0 Degree. Intent to kill murders in which the actor premeditated the killing are firstdegree
offenses; without premeditation, intent to kill murder is a second-degree offense.
Here, D had planned M’s death, conceiving the plan to provoke O into killing her, thus
premeditation is demonstrated.
0 0 Conclusion: D Guilty of Attempted First-Degree Murder. Because D intended
that M be killed, and because he undertook an act in furtherance of that intent by
attempting to provoke O into killing her, D will be criminally liable for attempted murder in
the first degree of M. He has no defenses to this crime.
-31-
0 0 0
People v. Otto
Solicitation of Murder. Defined supra. Here, O has not asked anyone to do anything,
much less commit a murder. He has solely acted on information D gave him, secretly
hoping to induce O to act. O is not criminally liable for solicitation of murder.
Conspiracy to Commit Murder. Defined and discussed supra. Conspiracy requires an
agreement between two or more parties, and while O did eventually try to kill M, he did so
of his own accord. O is not criminally liable for conspiracy to commit murder.
Attempted Murder. Defined supra.
0 Act in Furtherance. Defined supra. O’s strangling of M is an undeniable act in
furtherance of his intent to kill M.
0 Target Crime: Murder. Defined supra.
0 0 Homicide. Defined supra. O told M, “I’m going to kill you.” Clearly, he
desired to commit the homicide of M.
0 Malice. Defined supra.
0 0 Intent to Kill. Defined supra. O’s statement that he was going to kill M
demonstrates that he intended to kill her. Intent to kill being, by definition, a specific intent
crime, it can be the subject of a charge of attempt.
0 Degree. Defined supra. Here, it may be difficult to know for certain whether O
actually premeditated for a long period on M’s killing. However, by announcing his
intention to kill M, O has demonstrated that he has at least thought about it for a moment,
so premeditation is established and O will be liable for attempted murder in the first degree.
0 0 Conclusion: O May Be Guilty of Attempted First-Degree Murder. Barring a
successful defense, O will be criminally liable for the attempted murder of M in the first
degree.
0 0 0
Defense: Mitigation to Attempted Voluntary Manslaughter (VM). Where the elements
below are satisfied, a party may mitigate a murder down to VM. Here, O will claim that the
elements of VM are satisfied and that his attempted murder of M should be mitigated to
attempted VM. The elements are:
0 Reasonable Provocation. A provocation act must have occurred that would have
-32-
caused a reasonable person to lose his self control to such a degree that he would kill.
Because of the reasonableness standard, O’s bad temper will be immaterial to this
element. However, discovery of infidelity by a spouse has been held to be a reasonable
provocation. Here, O had “learned,” however incorrectly, that M had been unfaithful to him
from D. If a jury finds that a reasonable person would have believed D’s entreaties that M
had been caught in compromising positions on several occasions to be a reasonable
discovery of marital infidelity, then O will be able to establish this element.
0 Actual Provocation. The actor must have actually been provoked by the provocative
act; if the actor, not actually provoked, uses the act as a mere pretense for his crime, VM
mitigation will not be available. We’re told that O believed what D told him and acted on
it by going to M’s workplace and laying in wait for her in the storeroom, so he clearly was
actually provoked.
0 No Reasonable Cooling-Off Period. A period of time must not have lapsed in which
a reasonable person would have regained his self-control. Again, the reasonableness
standard makes O’s temper immaterial. In this case, we do not know the length of time
between the provocative act (learning of M’s alleged infidelity) and O’s attempt to kill M.
We only know that O waited for M, but we do not know for how long. We also do not know
how long it took O to get to M’s workplace. Without this information, it is impossible to
conclude as to whether there was a reasonable cooling-off period. If there wasn’t, VM
mitigation will not be available to O.
0 No Actual Cooling Off. The actor must not have actually cooled off prior to his act.
Here, we are told that, rather than cooling off, O became angrier and angrier with each
passing moment, attacking her as soon as she entered the storeroom. O clearly had not
actually cooled off.
0 0 0
Conclusion. If O can prove there was no reasonable cooling-off period, he will be able to
mitigate his criminal liability down to attempted voluntary manslaughter. If he cannot, he
will be criminally liable for the attempted murder of M in the first degree.
-33-
Answer B to Question 4
4)
I. State vs. Dan
a. Solicitation Of Murder: Solicitation is asking, aiding, enticing, encouraging others to
commit murder with a specific intent that the crime be committed. The facts indicate that
Dan secretly hoped that his conduct would provoke Otto to kill Mona. So the specific intent
is established. Solicitation is complete when the act of enticing is done even if the solicitee
rejects the solicitation. Here the act of telling Otto that Mona was having an affair with
another coworker knowing that Otto had a trouble[d] marriage and Otto suspected Mona
of infidelity and knowing that Otto had a very bad tamper [sic] will be sufficient to establish
enticement impliedly. Therefore, he is most likely found to be guilty of solicitation. A crime
once committed cannot be undone. Solicitation merges with conspiracy, attempt or
completed crime. It is generally a misdemeanor.
b. Conspiracy to Commit Murder: An agreement between two or more person [sic] to
commit an unlawful act or lawful act with an unlawful purpose and an overt act in
furtherance of the commission of the crime with a specific intent that crime be committed.
Conspiracy does not merge with attempt or the crime.
i. Agreement does not have to be express and it could be implied. In [a] majority of
states it requires two guilty minds. Dan will argue that though he secretly hoped that Otto
kill Mona [sic] but there was no express or implied agreement between the two.
ii. Two guilty Minds: In majority for conspiracy there should be at least two guilty
minds. The actus rea and mens rea must concur. Here though Otto hoped that Dan will
[sic] kill Mona, but the facts do not indicate whether at this time Otto had the specific intent
to kill Mona.
iii. An Overt Act: Otto will assert that he did not do any act in furtherance of the crime.
However, any act that is in furtherance of crime and committed by any coconspirator is
sufficient for the overt act requirement. Here, Otto’s going to Mona’s workplace will be
sufficient.
If the jury finds that there was no agreement between Dan and Otto to kill Mona either
express or implied Dan may not be guilty of conspiracy. On the other hand if the jury finds
that there was an implied agreement to murder Mona than [sic] Dan is guilty of conspiracy.
MPC Jurisdiction: An agreement with one or more person [sic] to solicit,
attempt or commit a crime or aiding to planning and commissioning of the crime. MPC
does not require two guilty minds. One guilty mind is sufficient. MPC does require an overt
act. Therefore, in MPC jurisdiction Dan is guilty of conspiracy to commit murder as he
-34-
solicited Otto by enticing him to commit murder.
c. Attempted Murder: The guilt of Dan will be based on vicarious liability based on
solicitation or coconspirator. Under Pinkerton’s rule, he is vicarious[ly] liable for the crimes
of Otto which are in furtherance of the agreement and that are foreseeable unless Dan
effectively withdraws. Dan had not withdrawn. So Dan is liable for attempted murder if
Otto is liable for attempted murder (see discussion below). He will be vicariously liable
based on solicitation in majority of jurisdiction [sic] and will not be liable based on
coconspirator if he is not found to be guilty of conspiracy under majority as discussed
above.
MPC Jurisdictions: MPC does not follow Pinkerton’s rule. MPC finds a D liable only if [sic]
acted in the commission of the crime or aided or abetted, that is only based on accomplice
liability. Since Dan did not acted [sic] in the commission of the crime, he may not be found
vicariously liable unless the jury finds that his act of telling Mona’s infidelity is aiding and
abetting[.] Then he will be guilty based on accomplice liability.
II. State vs. Otto:
a. Solicitation of Murder: Solicitation is defined supra. Otto did not ask or entice
anyone. He is the solicitee and Dan is the solicitor. Therefore, Otto cannot be guilty of
solicitation.
b. Conspiracy to Commit Murder: See supra for majority and MPC jurisdiction
definitions. Since the conspiracy is between Dan and Otto, the discussion of conspiracy
for Otto is similar to that of Dan. Otto will also argue that he did not have any agreement
with Dan to commit murder. He will also argue that he did not have any intent to kill Mona.
He went to her office just to confront her and to verify the veracity of Dan’s statement.
Since he did not have any intent than [sic] he cannot be guilty of conspiracy even under
MPC jurisdiction where one guilty mind is sufficient.
c. Attempted Murder: Specific intent to kill and an act in perpetration of murder that is
a substantial step and which is highly corroborative of the intent to murder.
i. Substantial Step: Here Otto went to Mona’s office and hid in the storeroom. He
jumped at Mona from behind the cabinet when she entered to get some supplies. Otto has
gone to the [sic] Mona’s office but the issue is whether this is highly corroborative of his
intent to commit the crime. There is no substantial certainty that Mona will visit the
storeroom. On the other hand Dan had told him that he has seen Mona in [a]
compromising position in the storeroom and that’s why he hid in the storeroom. So most
likely his hiding in the storeroom and waiting for her to visit coupled with his strangling of
Mona will be a substantial step.
ii. Specific Intent: The intent may be inferred based on D’s statement or conduct prior
to act and his relationship with the victim. Here Otto made a statement that he was going
-35-
to kill Mona before he strangled her may be [sic] sufficient to show intent. Also, the fact
that he was hiding and he believed that Mona was infidel [sic] may further be used to infer
his intent to kill Mona. On the other hand Otto will argue that he did not take any deadly
weapon with him nor he is an expert in strangling persons [sic] to death to negate his
specific intent.
iii. Factual Impossibility: Otto may also argue factual impossibility. Factual impossibility
exists when a D who seeks to perform a prohibited act is not able to do the act because
of the facts unknown to him. Otto will argue that it is impossible to kill someone in a
storeroom which is visited by all the employees with bare hand [sic] and he is not an
expert. However, factual impossibility is not a defense to attempt.
iv. Heat of Passion: If Otto can show that he cannot be guilty of murder than [sic] he
is also not guilty of attempted murder. So if he is able to show that had the crime been
committed it would have been only voluntary manslaughter [sic]. Heat of passion can
reduce the charge to voluntary manslaughter. This requires that:
a) a reasonable person is provoked (objective)
b) D was actually provoked (subjective)
c) a reasonable person would not have cooled off during the time interval between
provocation and D’s conduct (objective)
d) D was actually not cooled off.
It is reasonable that a person can be provoked when informed about wife’s
compromising positions and specially if Otto already suspected Mona of infidelity.
However, seeing your wife having sex with other [sic] is sufficient for provocation, but
hearing about the compromising position may not be sufficient for a reasonable person for
provocation. So even if Otto is provoked but a reasonable person will not be provoked
[sic]. Also, there probably is enough time for a reasonable person to cool off as he went
to Mona’s office and waited for her. In Otto’s case he did not cool off[,] instead he got
angrier. Since a reasonable person would not be provoked and would cool off, Otto’s
murder will not be mitigated to Voluntary Manslaughter.
State will argue that he had enough time to premeditate and deliberate in the
storeroom to commit murder[,] therefore he is guilty of attempted murder.

















California
First-Year
Law Students’
Examination
Essay Questions
and
Selected Answers
June 2005
i
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2005 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS’ EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2005 California First-Year Law
Students’ Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the
examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in
spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here
with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the
essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number Subject Page
1. Criminal Law 1
2. Contracts 7
3. Torts 19
4. Contracts 28
ii
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the
difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and
fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand
the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their
relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason
in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not
merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your
proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit.
State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal
doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general
application.
1
Question 1
Bill and Tom worked together as drivers for Ajax Armored Car Co. After Bill reported Tom
to the company’s management for violating a company policy, the company fired Tom.
Angered that Bill had “snitched” on him, Tom decided to get even with Bill.
Tom bought a pistol, some ammunition, and a rubber mask to use as a disguise. Expecting
that Bill would follow the same route and schedule that had been in effect before Tom was
fired, Tom hid behind a newsstand near a bank where the armored car ordinarily picked up
the bank’s daily receipts. He intended to put on the mask and rob Bill at gunpoint as he
emerged from the bank with the bags of money. As it turned out, the company had altered
the pick-up schedule so that the armored car had come and gone by the time Tom arrived
at the location.
Even more irate that he had missed this opportunity, Tom decided he would make a bomb,
follow Bill’s armored car, plant the bomb under the car at a time when Bill was inside the
bank picking up money, and detonate the bomb from a remote location as soon as Bill
reentered the car. Tom bought a book that contained instructions for making a bomb that
would be powerful enough to completely destroy an armored car, purchased the necessary
explosives and detonation materials, and began to assemble the bomb in the garage
attached to the house where he rented a room from the owner, who also resided there.
While he was assembling the bomb, Tom inadvertently ignited the materials, causing an
explosion and fire that resulted in burning down the house and garage.
What crimes, if any, did Tom commit? Explain fully.
2
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
Question 1: Tom’s Crimes
Attempted Robbery
Robbery is the trespassory taking and carrying away of personal property of another
with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of it, when it is accomplished by force,
threat of force, or intimidation. Tom did not accomplish this crime when he hid behind the
newsstand with a pistol, ammunition, and a rubber mask, because the armored car had
already come and gone by the time Tom arrived at the location.
Tom may have committed attempt if he intended that the crime of robbery be
completed, and took a substantial step toward such completion, going beyond mere
preparation. The facts state that Tom intended to rob Bill at gunpoint. While Tom’s
purchase of a gun and mask could be characterized as a mere preparation, when he hid
behind the newsstand, Tom was dangerously close to completing the crime, if the facts
were as he believed them to be (i.e. the previous truck schedule). Therefore Tom
committed attempted robbery.
Attempted Larceny
Attempted larceny is a lesser included crime of attempted robbery. Therefore Tom
also committed attempted larceny, though he cannot be convicted of both.
Attempted Murder (Robbery Incident)
Tom is not guilty of attempted murder for the robbery attempt because at that time
he had no intent to kill. His use of a gun probably constitutes malice because it is reckless
disregard for human life, but to be guilty of attempt, one must intend the prohibited result,
i.e. Bill’s death. Likewise, felony murder malice is insufficient for attempt.
Defense of Impossibility
Tom may raise the defense of impossibility or mistake of fact in that it would actually
be impossible for him to have robbed Bill because of the schedule change. This defense
will fail, however, because if the facts had been as Tom believed them to be (i.e. the
previous schedule), he would be guilty of attempt.
Attempted Murder (Bomb Incident)
Tom is guilty of attempted murder if he intended to kill Bill and took a substantial step
toward accomplishing his goal. As stated supra, malice is not sufficient for attempted
murder. However, when he started making the bomb, Tom did intend to kill Bill, because
he planned to detonate a bomb planted in the armored car, completely destroying it, once
3
Bill had reentered. He will be found to have intended the natural and probable
consequences of his planned actions.
In addition, Tom must have gone beyond mere preparation. Tom’s purchase of a
book and materials may be mere preparation, but when he began to assemble the bomb,
he took a substantial step toward completing his crime that brought him in dangerous
proximity to completion.
Attempted First-Degree Murder
In addition, if the jurisdiction has a degree murder system that classifies first-degree
murder as murder accomplished by bomb, poison, lying in wait, etc., then Tom would be
guilty of attempted first-degree murder. In the case of the definition being premeditation
and deliberation, Tom is also guilty, because he made a cool-headed rational decision over
time.
Attempted Larceny or Robbery
Tom is likely not guilty of these crimes for the bomb incident, because he did not
intend to take and carry away the armored car or money, but destroy it by bomb where it
stood.
Arson
Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling of another. Malice may include
reckless disregard as to consequences. Tom acted with malice because he was building
an illegal bomb in a private home for use in a murder. He did not intend to burn the house,
but he did act with the required malice. The fire Tom inadvertently did [sic] burn down the
house. The owner did reside there, so it was a dwelling, and Tom was not the owner, so
it was the dwelling of another. Tom is guilty of arson.
Attempted Arson
Tom could not be convicted of arson and attempted arson because they would
merge. In addition, Tom did not intend the prohibited result of arson, i.e. the burning of the
dwelling of another. Tom is not guilty of attempted arson.
Houseburning
Tom may also be guilty of the common law offense of houseburning, because he
burned his own house, if it threatened neighboring houses. However, here Tom is guilty
of the greater crime of arson.
4
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
1)
STATE v. TOM
1) Did Tom commit ATTEMPTED ROBBERY of Bill?
Under criminal law, attempted robbery is committed when a significant step is taken toward
the commission of a crime with the intent to commit the crime. A significant step is one that
is more than mere preparation. Robbery is a larceny, a trespassory taking and carrying
away of the personal tangible property of another with the intent to permanently deprive,
from the victim’s person or presence by force or fear.
Here, Tom clearly had intent because he “intended to put on the mask and rob Bill” and he
was doing this to “get even with Bill.” He had the intent to rob because he was going to
take the bags of money from Bill when he emerged from the bank. The[n] this would have
been a tresspassory taking and carrying away of the property of another because Tom was
going to take the money and the money belonged to the bank and its customers. It would
have been committed by force or fear since Tom intended to put on the mask as a disguise
and rob Bill at gunpoint.
Tom also took a significant step toward the commission of a robbery because after buying
a pistol, ammunition, and a rubber mask, he went to a place near the bank and hid while
waiting for Bill to arrive in the armored car, where he intended to rob Bill when he arrived
pursuant to the normal pick-up schedule. He chose and arrived at a place to wait, knowing
the delivery route and schedule, expecting Bill to arrive [at] a particular time so Tom could
rob him.
Therefore, Tom committed an attempted robbery.
2) Can Tom assert the defense of IMPOSSIBILITY?
Under criminal law, factual impossibility occurs where unforeseen circumstances prevent
the commission of an otherwise illegal act. Legal impossibility is found where the
defendant intends an act, thinking it is illegal, but at the time attempted it is legal. Factual
impossibility is not a defense to attempt, legal impossibility is.
Here, there was a factual impossibility, because the [sic] Tom intended to commit an illegal
act, a robbery. The robbery was only prevented because the company had altered the
pick-up schedule so that the armored car had come and gone by the time that Tom had
arrived at the location.
Therefore, since this was a factual impossibility, this defense will fail.
5
3) Has Tom committed an ATTEMPTED MURDER of Bill?
Attempt is defined supra. Here the requisite intent would be the intent to commit the
murder of Bill. Murder is an unlawful homicide, the killing of one human being by another,
with malice. Malice can be established in several ways, including the intent to kill or the
intent to cause serious bodily injury.
Here, the facts show that Tom decided to make a bomb and use that bomb to destroy the
armored car the [sic] Bill was driving. Further the facts show that Tom had bought a book
that contained instructions for making a bomb that would be powerful enough to destroy
the armored car. Also, Tom planned to wait for Bill to complete his pick-up and wait for him
to “reenter” the armored car before detonating the bomb. This clearly shows that Tom had
an intent to kill Bill since it is very unlikely that a person in a vehicle that is completely
destroyed by a bomb would survive the explosion.
However, Tom will argue that he did not take a significant step toward the commission of
the murder because the bomb detonated before he had finished assembling the bomb. He
will argue he never came close to killing Bill since he never arrived at the potential scene
of the crime. The state will argue that Tom did commit a significant step when he bought
the book, purchased the necessary explosives and began to assemble the bomb. Tom’s
argument will probably fail.
If the state can show that Tom’s actions constituted a significant step, the[n] Tom has
committed attempted murder of Bill.
4) Has Tom committed ARSON of the house and garage?
At common law, arson was the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another.
Modernly arson is defined by statute to include other structures as well as the defendant’s
own home if the intent is to collect the insurance proceeds. Malice is an act intended to
bring about the criminal result or an act with willful and wanton disregard that the criminal
result would occur.
Here, Tom will argue that he had no intent to burn the dwelling because his act of igniting
the explosive materials was inadvertent. Further, he will argue that this was not more than
ordinary negligent conduct and would thus be insufficient for a charge of arson. However,
the state will argue that building an explosive device in the attached garage of a residential
building would constitute gross recklessness, particularly in light of the fact that the intent
of the bomb was for the perpetration of a murder. Additionally, there are no facts to
suggest that Tom had any experience in dealing with explosives since his profession was
that of an armored car driver and he had to buy a book to learn how to make a bomb. The
state will likely prevail on this point.
There was a burning of a dwelling house because it was a “house” and it was “burned.”
The initial burning of the garage would suffice since it was an attached garage and would
6
be considered either part of the dwelling or at minimum the curtilage of the house.
Tom will argue that it was not the dwelling house of another because he lived there (rented
a room). However, the house was owned by someone else, and the owner also lived in the
house and Tom only rented a room from the owner; therefore it was the dwelling house of
another.
Therefore Tom has committed an arson.
7
Question 2
Buyer manufactures mattresses, which feature an outer layer composed of a cotton
material called “batting.” Unexpectedly, Buyer’s supply of batting ran out, which brought
the entire production line to a halt at a time when Buyer was trying to fill a large, special
order from Sleepco, one of his customers. Buyer’s regular supplier of batting refused to
deliver any more batting because Buyer was behind on his payments to the supplier.
On May 1, Buyer telephoned Cotton Co. and told Cotton Co. that he urgently needed a
large bale of batting and that he was willing to pay “top dollar” if Cotton Co. would deliver
the bale of batting by the end of the day.
On May 1, Cotton Co. delivered the bale of batting and told Buyer it would send him Cotton
Co.’s invoice for $5,000 later in the week. Buyer was upset because the price was about
30% higher than that charged by his regular supplier but, because of his urgent need,
Buyer opened the bale and began using the batting to make mattresses.
On May 2, at a time when Buyer had used about 5% of the batting, Sleepco called and
cancelled the order. This cancellation was such a major blow to Buyer’s financial condition
that he announced that he would immediately close his manufacturing plant.
On May 5, Cotton Co. learned that, in fact, Buyer had been insolvent for the past 60 days.
On May 6, Cotton Co. demanded that Buyer either pay the invoice or return the unused
part of the bale of batting immediately. Buyer refused, asserting that he and Cotton Co.
had never entered into an enforceable contract, and informed Cotton Co. that he had sold
the remaining batting to another mattress manufacturer.
1. Can Cotton Co. prevail in an action for breach of contract against Buyer?
2. Does Cotton Co. have the right to reclaim the unused batting? Explain fully.
8
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
1. COTTON CO. V. BUYER
1. U.C.C. V. COMMON LAW
The U.C.C. will govern contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are items which are
identifiable and movable at the time of sale.
This contract is for the sale of a bale of cotton batting. Cotton batting is movable and
identifiable at the time of sale; therefore, it is a good[.]
This contract will be governed by the U.C.C.
Merchants
One who regularly deals with the goods which are the subject matter of the transaction or
otherwise holds himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the goods which are
the subject matter of the transaction[.]
Cotton Co. sells cotton batting as a business; therefore, they regularly deal with the goods
involved. Further, since they manufacture the batting, they will have special knowledge and
skill regarding the batting. Therefore, Cotton Co. is a merchant[.]
Buyer makes mattresses which use the batting, and must order great quantities of batting.
Therefore, Buyer regularly deals with the subject matter involved. Further, since Buyer
uses batting in his manufacturing, he likely has special knowledge and skill of the batting.
Thus, Buyer is also a merchant[.]
Therefore, both parties are merchants under the U.C.C. and will be held to a higher
standard of good faith and fair dealing[.]
1. FORMATION
A valid contract consists of an offer and an acceptance, collectively known as mutual
assent, plus consideration, minus applicable defenses[.]
OFFER
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is definite in terms and is
communicated in such a way as to create in the offeree the reasonable expectation that the
offeror is willing to enter into a contract[.]
Buyer called Cotton Co. and made Cotton Co. an offer with the following definite terms:
9
Quantity One bale
Time of Performance Before the end of the day
Identity of Parties Cotton Co. and Buyer
Price “Top dollar”
Subject Matter One bale of cotton bating
Buyer will argue that this is not sufficiently definite to constitute an offer, since no price term
is included. However, Cotton Co. will argue that, under the U.C.C., only a quantity term is
needed to make the offer definite, so long as the parties unequivocally manifest intent to
contract. Here, Buyer stated the quantity of one bale; therefore, the terms are sufficiently
definite.
Cotton Co. will argue that Buyer made a sufficient manifestation of intent under the
objective theory of contracts because a reasonable person in Cotton Co.’s shoes would
believe that, by asking for delivery of a specific quantity of goods, and promising to pay, the
party promising to pay intends to enter into a contract[.]
Further, Cotton Co. will show that Buyer created the power of acceptance in Cotton Co. by
providing that Cotton Co. could bind Buyer to a contract simply by delivering the cotton bale
before the end of the day.
Cotton Co. will argue that the offer gives them the power to set the price term since Buyer
did not state a price, but said he would pay “top dollar” for the bale. If the court finds that
Cotton Co. has the power to set the price term, Cotton Co. must set the term in good faith,
or Buyer may set the term in good faith himself. If the court finds that the statement of “top
dollar” was an ambiguous term that did not give Cotton Co. the power to set the price, the
courts will set the price at the time of delivery[.]
This is likely an offer[.]
Unilateral vs. Bilateral Contract
A unilateral contract requires acceptance by performance, a bilateral contract requires
acceptance by a return promise[.]
Here, Buyer stated that he would pay “if Cotton Co. would deliver the bale of batting by the
end of the day.” Cotton Co. will argue that Buyer is bargaining for performance, not a
promise, since Buyer only wants to be bound to the contract if the bale is delivered by the
end of the day.
Buyer may counter that they wanted assurance from Cotton Co. that delivery would be
made, and the term “by the end of the day” was condition, not the means of acceptance.
Where the court finds that the contract may be either unilateral or bilateral, acceptance may
10
be made by any means reasonable under the circumstances[.]
Therefore, Cotton Co. may accept the offer by any reasonable means[.]
Acceptance
An outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer[.]
Cotton Co. delivered the batting before the day was over. This is an outward manifestation
because Cotton Co. physically delivered the bale. Further, it showed unequivocal assent
because Cotton Co. impliedly agreed to all the terms of the contract.
Buyer will argue that Cotton Co. did not properly accept because they set a price term
which was 30% above what Buyer usually pays. However, as discussed supra, Cotton Co.
may have had the power to set the price term. If Cotton Co. had that power, Buyer must
show that the price was not set in good faith.
However, even if Buyer can show the price was not set in good faith, Cotton Co. will likely
successfully show that Buyer accepted the price term by accepting the goods and using
part of them. Cotton Co. will show that this is implied assent to the term under the objective
theory of contracts because a reasonable person would believe that using goods knowing
the terms of sale demonstrates one’s willingness to be bound[.]
Here, the facts do not state if Cotton Co’s price was unreasonably disproportionate to the
fair market value of the batting. However, if it was found to be unreasonable, Buyer may
then set the price in good faith. However, Cotton Co.’s failure to set the price does not
affect the validity of the acceptance.
Cotton Co. will show that, because the offer did not specify whether acceptance could be
made by promise or performance, delivery in the time stated was a reasonable means of
accepting[.]
This is a valid acceptance[.]
Consideration
A bargained-for exchange of legal benefit and detriment[.]
Each party incurred a legal detriment because Cotton Co. was giving up goods in exchange
for Buyer giving up money.
Further, each party received a legal benefit because Cotton Co. received money and Buyer
received goods.
The exchange of money for goods was what induced each party to contract, because each
11
party viewed what they gave up as the price for what they received. Therefore, the
exchange was bargained for[.]
Buyer may argue that Cotton Co.’s ability to set the price rendered the contract illusory.
However, because Cotton Co. is obligated to set the price in good faith, Cotton Co. is under
a legal obligation; therefore, it is not illusory.
There is sufficient consideration[.]
Defenses to Formation
Statute of Frauds - Sale of Goods at $500 or more
Contracts for the sale of goods at $500 or more must be in writing in order to be
enforceable[.]
This contract is for the sale of batting, which is a good. Further, the price is $5,000, which
is over $500. Therefore, the contract must be in writing in order to be enforceable.
The facts state that the contract was made orally over the phone, with the only writing being
an invoice sent by Cotton Co. Therefore, the contract was not in writing[.]
This will be a valid defense absent an applicable way to remove the contract from the
statute[.]
Part Performance
Part performance of a sale of goods contract will render the contract enforceable as to the
portion which has been performed[.]
Here, Cotton Co. sent all the batting to Buyer; therefore, the contract has been partly
performed because the goods have been delivered.
Thus, the contract will be enforceable under the Statute of Frauds for all goods now
delivered[.]
This is not an applicable defense[.]
Unconscionability
Buyer will argue that the contract is unconscionable because the contract price is 30%
above what Buyer usually pays. However, the facts do not state how disproportionate the
contract price is to the fair market value of the goods.
Many courts do not allow a contract to be voided because of disproportionate terms;
12
however, in a minority of courts Buyer may prevail if he can show that the price is grossly
disproportionate to the value of the goods.
This is likely not an adequate defense[.]
Indefiniteness
Buyer may argue that the contract was not sufficiently definite because the price term was
not set. However, as noted supra, quantity is the only term required under the U.C.C., and
that term is definite[.]
This is not an adequate defense[.]
Ambiguity
Buyer may argue that the contract is too ambiguous to be enforced. However, the required
terms under the U.C.C. are not ambiguous, and the price term can be objectively set either
by Cotton Co., or by the court[.]
This is not an applicable defense[.]
CONDITIONS
An act or event not certain to occur, the occurrence of which either discharges an absolute
duty to perform or causes an absolute duty to perform to arise[.]
Express Condition Precedent
A condition stated in the contract which must occur before one party’s duty to perform
arises[.]
If the court finds that the statement requiring “delivery by the end of the day” was a term
of the contract, Buyer will show that this is an express condition precedent to Buyer’s duty
to pay, since Buyer specifically stated that he would not pay if it was not delivered on time[.]
This may be a condition[.]
Fulfillment of Condition
An express condition must be perfectly fulfilled[.]
Cotton Co. delivered the batting on time; therefore, the condition has been fulfilled and
Buyer’s duty to perform has arisen[.]
DUTY
13
Buyer has a duty to pay the full contract price for the batting[.]
DISCHARGE OF DUTIES
Impossibility
A contract which becomes objectively impossible through unforeseen circumstances will
discharge the duties under the contract so long as the risk of the impossibility occurring was
not assumed by the party seeking discharge[.]
Buyer will argue that it is impossible for him to perform because he does not have any
money and the buyer of his mattresses canceled their orders.
However, other parties could pay the contract price; therefore, it is not objectively
impossible to perform. Further, Buyer likely assumed the risk of the impossibility occurring,
since loss of money is a known risk which manufacturers assume[.]
This is not an applicable discharge[.]
Impracticability
A contract where an unforeseen event makes the terms so disproportionate as to be
commercially impracticable will be discharged where the risk of the circumstance creating
the impracticability was not assumed by the party seeking discharge[.]
Buyer will argue that the contract is impracticable because the price term is so high.
However, no event caused the term to become disproportionate; Buyer accepted the term
at the beginning of the contract[.]
Further, the facts do not demonstrate that the term is grossly unfair so as to be nearly
unconscionable[.]
This is not an applicable discharge[.]
Frustration of Purpose - Henry v. Krell [sic]
A party’s duty under the contract may be discharged where the essential purpose of the
contract is destroyed by an unforeseeable event, the risk of which was not assumed by the
party seeking discharge[.]
Buyer will argue that, when Sleepco canceled their order, the essential purpose of the
contract was frustrated, since Buyer no longer needed the batting to fulfill the large order.
However, Cotton Co. will show that the purpose of the contract was the sale of the batting,
14
and nothing in the facts indicate that Cotton Co. had reason to know of Buyer’s purpose for
the batting.
Further, Buyer likely assumed the risk of the frustration occurring, since cancellation of
orders is a known risk which manufacturers assume[.]
This is not an applicable discharge[.]
BREACH
An unjustified failure to perform one’s duties under the contract[.]
Cotton Co. will argue that Buyer is in major breach because Buyer refuses to pay for the
goods. Payment for the goods is the essential purpose of the contract.
Buyer is in major breach[.]
REMEDIES
Expectation Damages
Cotton Co. may recover the contract price since Buyer fully accepted the goods and will not
return them for resale.
Therefore, Cotton Co. will prevail in an action against Buyer for breach of contract[.]
2. DOES COTTON CO. HAVE A RIGHT TO RECLAIM THE UNUSED BATTING?
Bona Fide Purchaser
Buyer sold the batting to another manufacturer. The manufacturer who bought the batting
did not know of the breach by Buyer regarding the contract; therefore, the repurchaser
bought the batting in good faith.
Because the batting was purchased in good faith without knowledge of the breach, the
repurchaser is a bona fide purchaser of the batting.
The law generally holds that recouping goods from a bona fide purchaser would result in
unjust hardship to the purchaser; therefore, Cotton Co. may not receive the batting back,
since the repurchaser purchased in good faith[.]
Cotton Co. may not recover the batting, though they may sue for the contract price as
discussed supra[.]
15
16
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
2)
I. Can Cotton prevail in action for breach of contract against Buyer?
1. What law applies? The common law is the general rule governing contracts
except where superseded by the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC)[,] which governs
contracts for the sale of goods. Here, the contract subject matter is a bale of cotton batting,
which is a moveable good. Therefore the UCC governs.
2. Are the parties merchants? A merchant is one who, by his trade or occupation
is an expert, or who holds himself out as an expert, in the goods of the kind. Here, Buyer
manufacturers mattresses, which require a layer of cotton batting. Since in order to be in
the mattress business, Buyer must regularly deal in cotton batting, Buyer would be
considered an expert in cotton batting and therefore is probably a merchant. Cotton is a
merchant because they deal in cotton batting as their trade. The rights of the parties will
be affected by specific UCC rules applicable when both parties are merchants.
3. Was a contract formed? A contract is formed through a bargaining process of
offer, acceptance and exchange of consideration where both parties agree to a mutually
agreed set of terms.
a. Was there an offer? An offer is a manifestation of a present intent that
would reasonably be interpreted as intent to enter into a contract. On M[a]y 1 Buyer called
Cotton to say Buyer urgently needed a bale of cotton and would pay “top dollar” if it was
delivered that day. Cotton was the identified offeree, the subject matter was a bale of
cotton, and the quantity was “one”. Buyer offered to pay “top dollar.[”] The offer was a
unilateral offer in that Cotton could only accept if they delivered that bale by the end of that
day.
i. Was a term ambiguous? “Top dollar” is not a clear
unambiguous price term, but under UCC, the court could find a price for the
cotton from the market price prevailing at time and place of delivery.
Therefore the offer does not fail for the term.
b. Was there an acceptance? Acceptance requires that the offeree manifest
their present intent to enter into a contract. Under the common law, acceptance had to
“mirror image” the offer. However, under UCC acceptance can be made in any manner
reasonable. Here, Cotton accepted by delivering the bale of cotton by the end of the day.
Therefore they complied with the terms of Buyer’s offer and accepted by performing as
requested.
4. Was there consideration? Consideration is a legal detriment that the party
17
provides to bind the promise of the other party, and must [be] the object of the other[‘]s
pro[m]ise and be given in exch[a]nge for the other[‘]s promise. Consideration is leg[a]l
detriment if it is an act or right that the party was not otherwise obligated to do or refrain
from doing. Here, Cotton delivered the bale based upon Buyer’s promise to pay “top
dollar”. Since the value of “top dollar” can be supplied by the court, the value comprises
legal detriment and there is sufficient consideration to bind the agreement.
5. Since the parties clearly intended to enter into a contract each with the other,
they assented to mutual terms sufficient that a reasonable person would find a contract
existed. Therefore, upon delivery of the bale, a contract was formed.
6. Defenses to formation.
a. The Statute of Frauds (SOF) requires that certain contracts be evidenced
by a writing suffici[e]nt to enforce the contract. Under UCC, a contract for goods for $500
or more requires a writing. Here, the parties made an oral promise and accepted
performance. There is not writing apparent from the facts. However, there are substitutes
for the written contract[.]
1. A merchant[‘]s confirming memo would be a sufficient
writing, where the parties are both merchants and the memo is signed by one
party, delivered to the other, and the other does not object within ten days.
Here, Cotton states th[a]t they were going to send Buyer an invoice; however
it is not stated tha[t] they did. If they in fact sent the invoice it would be
sufficient if Buyer does not object.
2. Performance is an exception to the requirement for a writing.
Here, Cotton delivered the bale of cotton and performed under the contract.
Therefore a writing is not required and the contract is outside SOF and
therefore enforceable.
b. Unilateral Mistake is a defense to formation where one party relied on a
mistaken material fact and the other party knew or should have known that the first party
was mistaken. Here, Cotton bargained for the return payment of Buyer under the belief
that Buyer was able to pay. Subsequently, Cotton discovered that Buyer was insolvent for
54 days prior to their offer. Since Buyer expressly offered to “pay top dollar”, they knew
that Cotton would rely upon their payment in entering into the contract. Buyer also knew
that they were insolvent. Since they knew this fact and knew that Cotton would rely, the
contract is voidable by Cotton for unilateral mistake.
7. Performance
a. Cotton delivered the bale and Buyer accepted it and began using the
cotton. Therefore Cotton’s portion of the contract was complete. Completion of Cotton[’]s
performance matures Buyer[’]s duty to perform; which is in this case the duty to pay “top
dollar”.
18
b. Repudiation. Buyer announced it was closing its manufacturing plant. Of
itself, this is not a repudiation of its contract with Cotton. However, Cotton learned that
Buyer was insolvent for the past 60 days. Coupled with the closure of the plant, this was
information from a reliable source that raised doubts as to Buyer[‘]s ability to perform.
1. Reasonable assurance: Cotton then demanded that Buyer either
pay or return the goods. This demand was effectively a demand for reasonable assurance
that Buyer would perform. When Buyer refused, it was an anticipatory breach. Cotton[‘]s
rights under the contract accelerated, and they were able to accelerate their rights. Here,
their rights are to receive “top dollar” for the bale of cotton.
8. Defenses:
a. Frustration of Purpose: Buy[e]r will assert that commercial frustration [sic].
Here, Buyer urgently needed the bale in order to fill a contract with Sleep [sic]. Once Sleep
[sic] canceled their contract, the purpose for buying the bale was frustrated. Here,
however, Buyer did not inform Cotton of the purpose for the urgency. Therefore Cotton did
not know of the purpose of the contract and frustration of purpose is inapplicable.
II. Does Cotton Co. have the right to reclaim the batting?
1. Voidable contract: Here there was a mistake of fact that made the contract
voidable by Cotton. Ordinarily, Cotton would have a right to reclamation. However, here
the bale was sold to a good faith purchaser, which cuts off the rights for reclamation.
Therefore Cotton would have no right to reclaim the bale.
19
Question 3
Roofer contracted with Hal to replace the roof on Hal’s house. The usual practice among
roofers was to place tarpaulins on the ground around the house to catch the nails and other
materials that were scraped off during the removal of the old roof. On this occasion, Roofer
did not have enough tarpaulins, and he failed to place one on the ground at the rear of
Hal’s house. As a result, many nails and old roofing material fell into the grass of Hal’s
back yard. At the end of the job, Roofer did his best to clean up the back yard but missed
some of the nails that were imbedded in the grass.
About six months later, as Hal was mowing his back lawn, his lawnmower ran over one of
the nails and propelled it over the fence into the back yard of Ned, his neighbor. A few
days later, as Ned was walking barefoot in his back yard, he stepped on the nail, which
pierced his foot, causing him severe injury.
In an action brought by Ned against Roofer for negligence, what defenses might Roofer
reasonably assert, and what is the likely outcome on each? Explain fully.
20
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
3)
Ned v. Roofer
A prima facie case of negligence requires a showing of a duty to exercise reasonable care,
that the defendant breached the applicable standard of care[,] and that the breach was the
actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury. To defend against a negligence cause
of action, Roofer may assert passive defenses challenging the negligence elements as well
as active defenses including assumption of the risk, or comparative fault/contributory
negligence depending on the jurisdiction.
1. Did Roofer owe Ned a Duty?
a. A duty is a legal obligation to exercise reasonable care to prevent foreseeable
harms to foreseeable plaintiffs. In a leading case (Palsgraf v. LIRR), Judge Cardozo
detailed that a foreseeable plaintiff is one who is within the zone of danger; however, in the
same case, Judge Andrews argued for the minority opinion that if a defendant owes a duty
to anyone, he owes a duty to everyone. In appropriate cases, a duty may arise as a result
of a statute, contract, special relationship between the defendant and the plaintiff, where
the defendant assumes a duty, or where the peril to the plaintiff is caused by the defendant.
b. Here Roofer will argue that he owes no duty to Ned given that Ned was not a
foreseeable plaintiff. Ned was a neighbor an[d] outside the area where Roofer was
dropping items from the roof and there is minimal possibility of direct harm. However,
Roofer clearly owed a duty to Hal and his family and under the Andrews view would
therefore owe a duty to Ned.
c. Ultimately this will be decided by the jury; however, under the Cardozo view,
Roofer would appear to have a defense. Under the Andrews view, a duty is apparent.
2. Did Roofer breach the standard of care?
a. The standard of care is generally an obligation to exercise a reasonable amount
of care under the circumstances. Breach can be demonstrated where there is a violation
of a statutory standard of care (Negligence Per Se), under the Le[a]rned Hand Calculus,
or by making an inference of breach under the doctrine of Res Ipsa Loquitur. In this case
the Le[a]rned Hand Calculus is appropriate and is expressed in the following formula.
(B<P*L) where B is the burden of conforming conduct to an appropriate standard [of] care
sufficient to avoid harm, P is the probability that a harm[-]causing event would occur, and
L is the magnitude of the harm/loss should the anticipated harm[-]causing event occur.
Analysis is perceptual as opposed to mathematical and where the burden is less than
probability and magnitude of the loss, the act of the defendant shall be deemed to have
breached the standard of care.
21
b. Here the burden on Roofer is to have done a better job of picking up the nails
(possibly using a magnet if the nails were ferrous) or simply to have gotten sufficient tarps.
The burden of conforming his conduct would not have involved significant expense or effort
and is therefore low. The probability of the type of harm, a nail in the foot or theat the nail
would be picked up by the lawnmower[,] is significant while the magnitude of loss, puncture,
pain and the need for a tetanus shot as well as limping for a few days or weeks is low.
Roofer will argue, however, that his efforts to pick up the nails were reasonable because
he “did his best”. Further, it is not clear that he warned Hal that he missed some nails and
to be careful.
c. As such, it is clear under the Le[a]rned Hand Calculus, given that the burden is
exceeded by the probability and magnitude of loss, a breach is likely to be found and
Roofer will not escape liability on this basis despite his best efforts.
3. Was the act of Roofer the actual and proximate cause of Ned’s injury?
1. For negligence liability, the act of the defendant must be the actual (factual) as
well as proximate (legal) cause of the plaintiff’s injury.
a. Actual Cause?
1. Actual cause is based on whether the harm would have occurred
without the act of the defendant and is measured using the “But For” Test or the substantial
factor test. The “But for” test poses the question “but for” the act of the defendant, would
the plaintiff [have] been injured? The substantial factor test requires only that the act of the
defendant be a substantial factor in the harm that resulted.
2. Here, but for Roofer not picking up all of the nails, Ned would not
have been injured. Roofer will argue that the lawnmower was the actual case; however,
an injury is not restricted to one cause. In any event, the substantial factor test would
demonstrate that Roofer’s failure to recover all of the nails was a substantial factor in Ned’s
harm.
3. Roofer’s act was the actual cause and he will not likely be able to
defend on this basis.
b. Proximate cause?
1. Proximate cause is the legal cause of injury. A showing of
proximate cause requires that the injury sustained be not so distance [sic] in time, place
and effect from the act of the defendant that a court would refuse to assign liability.
Additionally, a showing of proximate cause requires that there must not be an independent
(unforeseeable) intervening event that occurred between to [sic] act of the defendant and
the harm suffered by the plaintiff such that is [sic] would break the chain of causation.
22
2. Here, Roofer will argue that the six month intervening time period
was too distant in order to establish proximate cause. Additionally he may attempt to argue
that the use of the Lawnmower by Hal was an independent intervening cause. This
defense is not likely given that Hal’s need to mow the grass was foreseeable. It is further
foreseeable that if the lawnmower hit a nail, that it might cause it to be deposited in the yard
of a neighbor. While the act of using the lawnmower was an intervening cause, it was not
independent because it was foreseeable. Since the use of the lawnmower is foreseeable,
it would not appear likely that when it was used would be relevant to the occurrence of the
harm[-]causing event. An additional intervening act was Ned’s decision to walk barefoot
in the yard. It is not clear that this will be seen as a foreseeable event although it is likely
since it was Ned’s yard and it is presumed that he would walk in it from time to time.
3. Based on the discussion, Roofer has plausible defense here, but
it is unlikely that this defense will prevail.
4. Did Ned Sustain Damage?
a. For negligence liability, the plaintiff must suffer actual damage. Damage includes
pecuniary (medical, lost wage[,] etc[.]) and non-pecuniary (pain and suffering generally).
b. Here the facts are clear; the nail punctured Ned’s foot and he suffered severe
injury.
c. Ned sustained damage sufficient to sustain his cause of action and Roofer will
not be able to defend on this point.
5. Can Roofer Raise Affirmative Defenses?
a. Did Ned Assume the Risk?
1. Assumption of the risk requires a showing that the plaintiff knew of the risk
of harm and voluntarily encountered the risk. Where proven, it is a complete bar to
recovery.
2. Here Roofer will argue that Ned likely knew of the work being performed
on Hal’s house and the possibility of nails in the yard. His decision to walk barefoot in the
yard therefore evidenced his assumption of the risk that his foot would be punctured if not
by a nail, a sharp stick or twig in the grass.
3. It is not likely that this defense will succeed but if accepted, it would allow
Roofer to completely avoid liability.
b. Contributory negligence of Ned?
23
1. In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, any negligence on the part of the
plaintiff is a complete bar to recovery. A negligent plaintiff may still recover provided that
the defendant had the last clear chance of avoiding the harm to the plaintiff and knew that
his act placed the plaintiff in danger.
2. Here, Ned’s decision not to wear shoes, especially after roofers were
tossing nails off of Hal’s roof, might be viewed as being contributory negligent. There is no
evidence, since it was 6 months later, that Roofer was aware of the potential harm to Hal
or that he had any chance to avoid it.
3. If accepted that Ned’s decision to walk barefoot was negligent, it will
completely bar his recovery from Roofer.
c. Comparative Fault of Ned?
1. In a pure comparative fault jurisdiction, the liability for damage of the
defendant is reduced in proportion to the fault of the plaintiff. While not a complete bar to
recovery it will reduce the potential award if the plaintiff’s negligence is proven. In a
modified comparative fault jurisdiction there are two approaches. In one, the plaintiff’s
award is reduced in proportion to his fault but is eliminated completely where the plaintiff’s
proportion of fault exceeds 50%. The other provides that the plaintiff’s award is reduced
in proportion to his fault but is eliminated completely where the plaintiff’s proportion of fault
is equal to or exceeds 50%.
2. Ned’s negligence discussed supra at contributory negligence.
3. If Roofer prevails with a showing that Ned was contributorily negligent, it
is likely to reduce the award that Ned will be entitled [to].
Conclusion:
A prima facie case of negligence likely exists. Roofer has a potential defense on the basis
of proximate cause; however, should this fail, he will have to apply an affirmative defense.
If a contributory negligence jurisdiction, a complete bar to recovery is likely. If a
comparative fault jurisdiction, he can likely rely on some diminishment in the award in
proportion to the fault attributed to Ned.
24
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
3)
NED V. ROOFER
Negligence
Negligence is the breach of a duty owed which is the actual and proximate cause of the
plaintiff’s injuries.
Duty:
A duty is owed to foreseeable plaintiffs.
Cardozo view (majority) - Anyone in the zone of danger created by the defendant’s
negligent conduct is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Andrews view (majority) - Anyone is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Here, Ned is an occupant of a neighboring house to Hal’s where Roofer replaced the roof.
Because he is physically close to where the roofing was going on and if the houses are
spaced close by, as shown by the facts because the nail propelled from Hal’s lawnmower
went over the fence and into Ned’s backyard, Ned is in the zone of danger.
And[,] in any case, under Andrews anyone is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Therefore Ned is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Standard of care
Reasonable person test
A person is held to the standard of conducting himself as a reasonably prudent other
person would do in the same or similar circumstances.
Special duty - Professionals
A professional is held to the standard of care of another professional in the same
community who holds the required credentials, skill[,] and competency of the profession.
Roofer will be held to the standard of a professional roofer.
Custom in the trade
25
Custom in the trade will be considered as evidence of what a reasonable professional’s
duty is. If he does not live up to the standard it will be considered evidence of a breach.
However even if he does conduct himself to the customs of the trade it is not always proof
that he acted with due care because due care may require a higher standard than
produced by following customer[sic].
Here the custom in the roofing trade is to place tarpaulins all around the ground around a
house where the roofing is being replaced. The purpose of the tarpaulins is to catch old
nails and other materials that get scraped off when the old roof is removed.
Here Roofer had a duty at a minimum to place tarpaulins all around Hal’s house when he
removed the old roof and replaced the new roof.
Breach
Is an unjustified failure to perform the duty as set out above.
Here, when Roofer showed up for the job without enough tarpaulins to cover the ground
and failed to place one at the rear of Hal’s house he breached his duty because another
professional roofer would have made sure he had enough tarpaulins before starting the job.
Although Roofer “did his best” to clean up, he missed some nails that were imbedded in the
grass in the backyard.
Roofer will argue that missing some of the nails is not a failure of his duty because there
are a lot of nails in a roof and even with the tarpaulins in place it is possible that old roofing
materials and nails could be scattered anyway even with due care, making reasonable
efforts to catch them on the tarpaulins[,] and to clean up.
However, Roofer’s failure to provide enough tarpaulins is a breach of duty. He did not
conduct himself to the standards of another professional roofer with credentialed expertise
in the community.
Therefore Roofer is in breach.
Actual cause
The defendant is said to be the actual cause of the plaintiff’s injury if it can be said “but for”
the defendant’s negligence the plaintiff would not have been injured.
Here it is possible that the nail that Roofer missed was not one of the nails that would have
been caught by the missing tarpaulin. However not having the tarpaulin was a substantial
factor in not catching all the nails and the facts are that the nail that injured Ned was one
from Hal’s backyard and that was the area not covered by a tarpaulin.
Therefore Roofer is an actual cause of Ned’s injury.
26
Proximate cause
Is a policy limiting liability to those injuries which are foreseeable at the time of the
defendant’s negligent conduct. We look to see if there are any intervening acts and if so
if [sic] are they [sic] foreseeable.
Here, Ned was severely injured by a nail piercing his foot. The nail came from Hal’s
backyard, the area which Roofer had failed to cover. The act of Hal’s running over the nail
with [h]is lawnmower and propelling the nail into Ned’s yard is an intervening act. We look
to see if it is foreseeable ---- and it is foreseeable that if nails are left on the lawn of a
homeowner that he will mow the lawn and the mower will kick up a nail. Therefore the
kicking up of the nail is foreseeable.
It is at issue whether it is foreseeable that not using a tarpaulin on a roofing job would
cause a neighbor to be injured by an errant nail kicked up by a lawnmower?[sic] One way
courts have looked at the injuries is that if the type of injury is foreseeable, the exact
manner in which it occurred is irrelevant[;] it will not break the chain of causation from the
defendant’s initial negligent act.
Another issue is if the injury from the nail was too remote in time from the roofer’s
negligence. This injury happened six months after roofing was done and it may be too
remote in time for the courts to consider that the injury was proximately caused by the
roofer’s negligence. Six months later if proper yard maintenance was being done or Hal
was more observant perhaps any remaining nails would have been discovered.
Roofer is the proximate cause of Ned’s injury.
Damages
In order to prove prima facie cause of negligence, the plaintiff must suffer damages.
Here, Ned suffered a severe injury to his foot and this is a personal injury sufficient to show
damage.
Ned will recover general damages for his pain and suffering and special damages for his
medical, hospital bills and for lost wages.
Defenses
Contributory negligence
The plaintiff fails to conduct himself as a reasonable prudent person in order to prevent
injury to himself.
In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, contributory negligence is complete bar to plaintiff’s
27
recovery.
Here, Ned was walking barefoot in his back yard and stepped on the nail. Roofer will argue
that Ned contributed to his own injury because he should have been wearing shoes.
However it is common for people to walk in their own backyards with bare feet and it is not
at all unreasonable to do so.
Roofer will not have the defense of contributory negligence.
Comparative negligence
In a comparative negligence jurisdiction the plaintiff’s recovery is reduced by his degree of
fault. In a pure comparative negligence jurisdiction, the plaintiff will recover no matter how
great his degree of fault. In a modified comparative negligence jurisdiction the plaintiff can
only recover if his negligence does not equal or surpass the defendant’s percentage of
negligence (depending on if a 49% or 50% jurisdiction.)
Therefore even if Ned is found slightly contributory negligent he will be able to recover his
damages less his degree of fault.
Assumption of the risk
A person voluntarily assumes a known risk.
Here Ned is simply walking barefoot in his own backyard, something which he likely does
often and from which he has received no injury. Therefore he is not assuming a risk of
anything by being barefoot. He of course knew that nails and roofing material were coming
down from Hal’s house when he saw Hal’s house being re-roofed but Ned saw the
tarpaulins and the cleaning up and would not have expected any nails in his yard[;]
therefore he could not have voluntarily assumed any known risks.
Therefore assumption of the risk is not a valid defense.
28
Question 4
Sam decided he was ready to sell his classic sports car. On May 1 and in the following
order, he telephoned Bob, Carla, Dan, and Edna, each of whom had earlier expressed
interest in buying the car. He was unable to make actual contact with any of them, so he
left the following message on each one’s telephone answering machine: “I’m ready to sell
my car, which I know you’ve expressed interest in. The price is $10,000. My offer is good
until the end of today, May 1. If you’re still interested, call me back by the end of today so
I’ll know for sure.”
Bob, Carla, and Dan each called back at a time when Sam was out running errands. They
each left a message on Sam’s telephone answering machine.
Bob’s message said, “The price is pretty high, so I’ll have to think about it.”
Carla’s message said, “I think the price is too high, but I’d be willing to pay you $9,000.”
Dan’s message said, “OK, I’ll pay your price but only if you’ll let me take the car to my
mechanic so he can check it out first.”
Edna, rather than call Sam back, mailed Sam a letter on May 1 stating, “I got your
message, and I accept your offer and will pay $10,000.”
On May 2, Sam died. Mark was appointed as executor for Sam’s estate, and as such had
all powers to deal with the estate property. Bob, Carla, Dan, and Edna each said to Mark,
“I accepted Sam’s offer on May 1, and, in any event, I will buy the car as is and for Sam’s
asking price.” Mark tells them each that their so-called acceptances were not valid and that
their power of acceptance has already terminated.
Is Mark correct? Explain fully.
29
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
4)
The rights and remedies of the parties depend on whether or not there is a valid contract.
A contract is a promise or set of promises, the performance of which the law recognizes
as a duty, and [for] the breach of which the law provides a remedy. A valid contract is
based on an offer, an acceptance, and legal consideration.
Which law governs?
Under contract law, the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) governs contracts for moveable
goods identifiable to the contract, otherwise the common law prevails. Here, the contract
is for a classic sports car, which is a moveable good identified to the contract. Therefore,
this contract is governed by the UCC.
Are the parties merchants?
Under the UCC, merchants are those who deal in goods of that kind, and hold themselves
out by occupation, or knowledge and expertise regarding the good in the contract. Here,
the parties are not merchants because they are one time, casual buyers and seller of one
good. Therefore, the parties are not merchants.
Is a writing required?
Under contract law, the Statute of Frauds doctrine requires that certain goods be in writing,
including those for the sale of goods over $500. Here, the bargain is regarding the sale of
a good for $10,000, which would require a writing.
Was there an offer by Sam on May 1?
An offer is a manifestation of present intent and willingness to enter into a bargain, so
justified that a reasonable person (offeree) would know that his assent is invited and would
conclude it. Under common law, the essential terms are the parties, subject matter,
quantity, price and the time of performance. Under the UCC only the price are [sic]
required and UCC “gap fillers” can determine the remaining terms. An advertisement or
public offer made to more than one person is an invitation to bargain.
Here, Sam showed a present intent and willingness to enter into the bargain because he
called four different people that had showed [sic] previous interest in buying his car to sell
it to them. A reasonable person would believe that this was a present intent and
willingness to enter into a bargain. Here, his message was definite and certain because
although the parties were not specifically identified, all other terms were present[,] such as
the subject, the car, the quantity one car, the price of $10,000–which is an essential term
for a UCC contract and the time for performance is May 1, a material term to the offer when
30
it is expressly stated. This communication to the four people was an offer inviting
performance, or another promise for the $10,000 until the end of the day.
Did the offer lapse due to an operation of law?
An offer may be revoked due a lapse of time due to an operation of law when the offeror
dies before an acceptance is made, or the goods are no longer available. Here, Sam died
on May 2, and his offer for acceptance was due on May 1, therefore, the offer was not
revoked due to a lapse of time from operation of law, and his estate can be liable for cause
of action.
Bob v. Sam’s Estate (Mark)
Acceptance
Under contract law, acceptance is an assent to enter into the bargain, by any reasonable
manner, with varying terms.
Here, Bob did not assent to enter into the bargain because he said, “I have to think about
it,” which a reasonable person would claim expresses uncertainty, and interest, but not an
assent to enter a bargain at the present time. Therefore, this would not have been an
acceptance to Sam’s offer.
Carla v. Mark
Acceptance
Definition, see supra. Here, Carla assented to into the bargain, but offered varying terms.
Since the parties are not merchants, the offer of varying additional and inconsistent terms
would be a proposal or a counteroffer to Sam’s offer, and would not have been an
acceptance to Sam’s offer. In addition the varying term was an additional inconsistent
(material) term of the original offer and would require Sam’s approval before it was
considered. A change in price is a material term because it significantly shifts the offeror[‘]s
economic advantage. Therefore, Carla would not have effectively accepted Sam’s offer.
Dan v. Mark
Acceptance definition see supra. Here, Dan assented by saying, “O.K.,” but it was based
on a varying condition “if” you’ll let me take the car to my mechanic so he can check it out
first. Since Sam’s offer limited acceptance to the terms of his offer, Dan would have had
to take the car to the mechanic before the end of May 1 with Dan’s approval. Varying
terms that are consistent (not material) with the offer can be accepted if the offeror does
not object within a reasonable time. Here, Sam did not object and the offer could have
been accepted, but since the acceptance was based on a condition of the offeree that was
not met before the deadline of the offer, it would not have been a valid acceptance because
31
the deadline would have passed.
Edna v. Mark
Acceptance see supra. Here, Edna accepted Sam’s offer by a return promise, a bilateral
contract. Under the Mail Box Rule, an acceptance to a bilateral contract is effective upon
dispatch. Here, Edna mailed her acceptance on May 1, the deadline for acceptance,
however Sam’s offer specified that acceptance was based on “a call back by the end of the
day”, thus Sam would have had to receive Edna’s offer by the end of May 1[,] which was
not done. Therefore, Edna’s acceptance would not be valid.
Conclusion: Mark was correct and all of the parties’ power of acceptance would have
terminated.
32
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
Ans. 4
UCC - Since this case involves sale of car (a movable property), provisions of UCC apply.
However, none of the parties seem to be merchants from the facts of the case as they do
not seem to regularly trade in cars or seem to have expert knowledge in it.
BOB v. SAM’s estate
Offer - A valid contract is formed when there is a valid offer, valid acceptance[,] and mutual
assent of terms between parties backed by mutual consideration.
Offer: An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent communicated by
the offeree which is definite and certain in its terms, which gives a power of acceptance to
the offeree such as any reasonable person in the shoes of the offeree can presume that
he could conclude a bargain by giving an assent to the terms of offer in the manner
indicated by the offerer.
Sam’s offer contains all the following essentials of a valid offer[:]
Qty - One Sports Car
Time of Performance - Reasonable time (ready to sell)
Identity of Parties - Sam & Bob
Price - $10,000
Subject Matter - Classic Sports Car with Sam
Since all essential elements of a valid offer are present it forms an offer.
Whether Multiple letters cons[t]itute circular - overorder.
It can be argued that since Sam has sent same letter to 4 persons, it could be construed
as a circular and since there was a risk of overordering (more than one party accepting the
offer), hence it is merely an invitation to offer and not a valid offer. However, since Sam’s
offer was quite clear on its terms and there was no way for each of the addresse[s] of his
telephone call to know that there was more than one person to whom offer has [sic] been
made, each of the offer [sic] is valid. Sam runs the risk of overordering should such a case
arise.
The offer by Sam by leaving telephonic message is valid.
Acceptance: An acceptance is an unequivocal assent to the terms of offer.
In this case Bob left the message that “the price is pretty high, so I will have to think about
it.” He therefore did not communicate his unequivocal assent by accepting the offer by the
“end of today” as was indicted by Sam. His telephone message was therefore not a valid
33
acceptance and the offer of Sam to Bob would lapse by the end of that day.
There being no valid acceptance by Bob, there was no valid contract between Sam and
Bob[.]
CARLA vs. SAM’s estate
Offer: As discussed supra.
Acceptance:
As defined supra.
Since Carla left the message “I think the price is too high, but I’d be willing to pay you
$9,000,” Carla did not give an unequivocal assent to the offer, as she did not accept Sam’s
offer on price. Her message indicating her willingness to pay a price of $9,000 is a
counteroffer, which acts as a revocation of original offer of Sam. Sam now would have the
power to either accept or reject the counteroffer of Carla.
However, since Sam died on May 2 before responding back to Carla, [he] did not
communicate his acceptance to Carla, so there was no contract between Carla and Sam.
Carla could argue that it is a UCC contract, price is not one of the essential elements to
make it a valid contract, as reasonable price could always be substituted so long as Q[‘]ty
is definite. However, neither are the parties merchants nor did the offerer (Sam) wanted
[sic] the price to be open in his offer, since price was an essential part of Sam’s offer, any
acceptance had to give an assent to the price since it was expressly stated in the offer.
There is thus no valid contract between Carla & Sam.
DAN vs. SAM’s estate
Offer: As discussed supra.
Acceptance - Definition supra.
Dan wanted to first get the car inspected by his mechanic to check it out, although he did
agree on the price. However, since he made his acceptance conditional upon his mechanic
checking, he did not communicate his unequivocal acceptance to the offer by the end of
the day, as called for by the offer of Sam.
There was thus no contract between Sam & Dan.
EDNA vs. SAM’s estate
34
Offer: As defined supra.
Acceptance: As defined supra.
Edna did accept the offer, price of $10,000 and also mailed his [sic] offer on May 1.
Mail Box Rule: As per Mail Box Rule, any acceptance is valid and effective upon despatch.
In this case Edna has sent his [sic] offer on May 1 itself (deadline set by Sam), therefore
it should be a valid acceptance. However, an exception to Mail Box Rule, is there when
the offerer indicated manner of acceptance for the offeree. Sam’s offer clearly says ... “Call
me back by the end of today so I’ll know for sure...” Since an offerer is a master of his
offer, Sam had clearly left this message giving importance to the time and manner of
commun[i]cation so that he could be sure of acceptance by the end of the day.
Since Edna did not indicate his [sic] acceptance by return phone call, his [sic] acceptance
cannot be valid. It may at best be a counteroffer for the offerer.
Since Sam died before reading the reply of Edna, there was no chance for him to accept
Edna’s counteroffer. There was thus no valid contract with Edna.
Mark is therefore correct that none of the above ‘so called acceptances’ of all the parties
were valid and their power of acceptance terminated
a) - by not communicating unequivocally about acceptance in proper manner by end of
May 1
b) - Death of Offerer - Death of offerer also automatically revoked the offer.


















California
First-Year
Law Students’
Examination
Essay Questions
and
Selected Answers
October 2005
-i-
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
OCTOBER 2005 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS’ EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2005 California First Year
Law Students’ Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the
examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in
spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here
with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the
essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number Subject Page
1. Contracts 1
2. Criminal Law 11
3. Torts 19
4. Contracts 28
-ii-
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the
difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and
fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand
the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their
relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason
in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not
merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your
proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit.
State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal
doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general
application.
-1-
Question 1
Ed is the owner of the newly opened Ed’s Custom Car Wash, where car washes cost $25.
While he was grocery shopping in his home town, which is located 20 miles from Ed’s
Custom Car Wash, he was greeted by his friend Alice. After they chatted for a moment,
Ed said, “Come by my new car wash and I’ll give you a free car wash tomorrow.” Alice
replied, “Thanks. By the way, we’ve got a few extra tickets for the game tonight. If you
want them, they’re yours.”
A few minutes later, Ed ran into police officer Brown, who worked in Ed’s home town. Ed
said, “Officer Brown, if you will drive by my house soon and make sure everything is OK,
I’ll give you a free car wash tomorrow.” Officer Brown, who was about to begin his job of
patrolling Ed’s neighborhood, replied, “I accept your kind offer.” Officer Brown then left the
store and began his routine patrol, which, as always, promptly took him by Ed’s house,
where everything was in order.
When Ed returned home from shopping, he saw his next door neighbor, Charlie. Ed said,
“Charlie, I’ll give you a free car wash tomorrow at my new car wash.” Charlie replied,
“Thanks, I’ll take you up on that.”
As soon as Ed arrived at work the next day, he found a long line of cars at the car wash.
He phoned Alice and Officer Brown, and told them that he would not give them free car
washes. Then he saw Charlie, who had left work and driven for one-half hour to get to the
car wash and was waiting in line. Ed immediately told Charlie, “I am not going to give you
a free car wash.”
Does Ed have an enforceable obligation to Alice, Officer Brown, or Charlie? Discuss.
-2-
Answer A to Question 1
1)
I. ED AND ALICE: ENFORCEABLE OBLIGATION?
In order to determine if a valid enforceable obligation exists between Ed and Alice,
it must first be determined if a valid enforceable contract exists between the parties. As this
contract involves services, the Common Law of contracts would govern. To be
enforceable, a contract requires mutual assent (offer and acceptance), consideration, and
there must be no valid defenses to enforcement.
A. Mutual Assent. To be enforceable, a contract must first be based on valid
mutual assent. The two primary components of mutual assent are the offer, and
acceptance. An offer is a commitment communicated to an identified offeree containing
definite terms. Therefore, these elements must all first be established. If there is a valid
offer made by Ed to Alice, it would have occurred while the two of them were chatting.
During their conversation, Ed said to Alice “[C]ome by my new car wash and I’ll give you
a free car wash tomorrow.” When judging the validity of a commitment, an objective test
is used: [W]ould a reasonable person, hearing the words spoken and under the
circumstances, believe that the other party intended to enter into a contractual
agreement[?] Here, as the owner of a new car wash, Ed’s offer to Alice could be viewed
as either a favor, or as part of a promotion. Since the facts indicate that she was Ed’s
friend, it might be the former, particularly in light of the fact the offer was made twenty miles
away from his car wash, and arguably, Alice may not desire to drive so far to get her car
washed. As this offer was communicated directly to Alice (the identified offeree), stating
the exact terms of the offer (free car wash tomorrow), the other elements are here satisfied.
Therefore, if it is determined that Ed’s offer was indeed a valid commitment, a valid offer
will be found to exist.
To be accepted, there must be an unequivocal statement of assent to the terms of
the offer, communicated by the offeree back to the offeror. Here, Alice said “[T]hanks,” but
no more. Although not exactly the strongest form of assent, this would nonetheless appear
to be unequivocal. Furthermore, it was communicated directly to Ed, the offeror.
Therefore, it appears that a valid acceptance was made. However, since Ed called Alice
early the next day to tell her that he would not give them free car washes[sic], was the offer
revoked?
1. Revocation. Generally, an offer may terminate due to its own terms;
by acts of the parties; or by intervening illegality. Here, when Ed called Alice and advised
her that he would not perform under the agreement, he effectively revoked his offer.
Unless the offer is not freely revocable, then his revocation would terminate Alice’s ability
to accept Ed’s promise. Therefore, the offer may have already terminated prior to proper
acceptance. Alternatively, the additional element consideration must be determined to be
present for this contract to be properly formed.
-3-
B. Consideration. For there to be valid consideration, there must be a
bargained-for exchange between the parties; in other words, the promise must induce a
current exchange of performance from the other party. Additionally, there must be new
legal detriment to support the promise. Finally, the promise must be binding and obligatory;
it must not be illusory or discretionary. Here, Ed promised to wash Alice’s car for free. But
what did Alice promise Ed? While it is true that, following Ed’s offer, Alice did state: “[B]y
the way we’ve got a few extra tickets for the game tonight; if you want them, they’re yours,”
this statement was made after Alice had already accepted Ed’s offer. Therefore, it would
appear to be little more than a gift. As a gift does not typically constitute valid
consideration, these gift tickets would not suffice to satisfy this element. Since there does
not appear to be any bargained-for exchange between the parties, valid consideration does
not exist. Therefore, no contractual agreement was made between the parties. Ed would
not have any enforceable obligation to Alice.
II. ED AND OFFICER BROWN: ENFORCEABLE OBLIGATION?
As stated above, to determine if a valid enforceable obligation exists between these
parties, it must first be determined if a valid enforceable contract exists. Also as stated
above, this contract would also involve services, and as such, would be governed by the
Common Law of contracts.
A. Mutual Assent. As stated above, mutual assent requires a valid offer and
acceptance. Here, Ed made the same offer to Officer Brown (free car wash tomorrow) as
he made to Alice. Additionally, Ed gave a similar response to Ed’s offer, except in even
stronger words: “I accept your kind offer.” Therefore, it would appear that there are not
problems with mutual assent. Nonetheless, as with Alice, Ed called Officer Brown the next
morning and told him not to come to the car wash. Therefore, the Ed’s offer [sic] was likely
revoked prior to performance. Additionally, whether or not this is a valid enforceable
agreement hinges on whether or not there is valid consideration between the parties.
B. Consideration. As stated above, valid consideration requires a bargained-for
exchange between the parties; new legal detriment; and mutuality. Here, the Ed’s
consideration [sic] to Officer Brown consisted of his statement: “[I]f you drive by my house
soon and make sure everything is OK I’ll give you a free car wash tomorrow.” On its face,
this appears to be a valid bargained-for exchange. However, did this promise induce any
new legal detriment?
1. Preexisting legal duty. For new legal detriment, a party must promise
to do something he is not legally required to do, or promise NOT to do something he has
a good-faith belief he has a right to do. Here, Officer Brown’s consideration for Ed’s
promise to wash his car free consists in [sic] his driving by and making sure Ed’s house
was safe. However, this was already Officer Brown’s legal duty; as a police officer, he is
required to patrol Ed’s house, and in fact, was “about to begin his job of patrolling Ed’s
neighborhood” when Ed made his offer. As this patrol was “routine,” and something Officer
-4-
Brown did “as always,” this would not constitute new legal detriment. Therefore, valid
consideration does not appear to exist, and Ed would not appear to have any enforceable
obligation to Officer Brown.
III. ED AND CHARLIE: ENFORCEABLE OBLIGATION?
Also as stated above, there must first be a determination of a valid enforceable
contract existing between the parties for an enforceable obligation to exist. And once
again, as a services contract, the Common Law of contracts would govern.
A. Mutual Assent. Here, there do not appear to be any problems with mutual
assent. Ed communicated his commitment to an identified offeree (Charlie), and this
commitment contained definite terms (free car wash tomorrow at my new car wash).
Likewise, Charlie unequivocally assented to his offer (“[T]hanks, I’ll take you up on that”)
to Ed. The difference in this case scenario, however, is Ed’s failure to properly revoke his
offer. Unlike Alice and Officer Brown, whom Ed called the next morning and advised that
he couldn’t wash their cars, Charlie showed up the next day at the car wash. Which raises
the question: [B]y showing up at the car wash, was Ed’s offer to Charlie, then, irrevocable?
1. Equitable Option. Certain types of offers are not freely revocable. This
occurs in situations where one of the contracting parties reasonably, foreseeably, and
detrimentally relies on the other party’s promise. Here, Charlie had left work and driven for
one-half hour to get to Ed’s car wash in response to Ed’s offer. This resulted in Charlie
losing time from work, paying money for gas, and driving twenty miles to Ed’s car wash.
This could have resulted in lost income to Charlie. Since they are neighbors, and thus
since Ed presumably knows Charlie works, this detriment to Charlie was reasonably
foreseeable. For Ed to attempt to revoke his offer while Charlie was in line waiting for his
car wash should not be permitted to be a valid revocation. But was the offer, itself,
supported by valid consideration?
B. Consideration. While it does not appear that valid consideration exists to
enforce Ed’s promise ( for the reasons stated above), there are some situations where a
consideration substitute would be supplied by the courts. One such consideration
substitute exists under the theory of promissory estoppel.
1. Promissory Estoppel. As stated above, Charlie detrimentally,
reasonably and foreseeably relied on Ed’s promise when he left work early and drove the
twenty miles to get his car washed. In such a scenario, the court will allow the promise to
be enforceable even when consideration does not otherwise appear to exist. Given this
fact, coupled with the fact that Charlie was in fact waiting in line when Ed told him “I am not
going to give you a free car wash” would tip the scales in Charlie’s favor. Therefore, an
enforceable obligation exists between Ed and Charlie for the free car wash.
-5-
Answer B to Question 1
1)
Governing Law - All Contracts - Common law will govern
The law which governs these purported contracts will be the common law. The UCC
governs all contracts for sale of goods or future goods, while contracts, agreements, or
promises for services such as a car wash, are governed by the common law.
Alice v. Ed
Alice and Ed do not have a legally enforceable agreement.
Formation
Formation of a contract requires (1) a valid offer, (2) a valid acceptance of the offer, (3)
consideration or a substitute for consideration, and (4) a lack of valid defenses. These four
elements create an enforceable obligation.
(1) Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent (present intent to enter
into a bargain), communicated to the offeree in sufficiently clear and definite terms.
(a) Present intent/communicated to the offeree
Ed demonstrated present intent to make a gratuitous promise to Alice. However, because
this is generally considered a consideration issue, the primary discussion of whether this
offer is valid and whether an enforceable obligation has been created will be discussed
under the heading “Consideration[.]”
(b) Terms
The terms of Ed’s “offer” are:
Quantity - One (1)
Time - Any reasonable time the day after the offer
Identity - Ed and Alice
Price - Free
Subject matter - Car Wash
The “offer” is valid.
(2) Acceptance
At Common law, acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Alice unequivocally assented by replying, “Thanks.” Arguing from the circumstances, and
customary American usage of the term, it is clear that Alice intended to “accept,” or assent
to, Ed’s “offer.”
-6-
(3) Consideration
Consideration is bargained[-]for exchange of legal benefit and detriment, which induces the
parties to enter into the bargain[.]
(a) No consideration
Ed will argue that there was no consideration for his promise to give Alice a free car wash,
because she was to give nothing in return.
(b) Condition to promise
Alice will argue first that the consideration for the promise was “[C]ome by my new car
wash.” Because Ed’s promise was conditioned on this phrase, Alice will argue that it is
consideration.
However, Ed will successfully reply that this is merely a “conditional gratuitous promise.”
A conditional gratuitous promise is a promise conditioned on some term, but which is
nevertheless gratuitous and not sufficient for consideration[.] (“Come by my house
tomorrow, and I’ll give you my old TV set,” is not valid consideration.)
(c) Return promise
Alice will next argue that her return promise to give Ed “a few extra tickets” to the game that
night was sufficient consideration in return for his promise to give her a free car wash.
However, Ed will reply successfully that this was merely a gratuitous promise in return. The
exchange was neither (1) bargained for, or (2) meant to induce the other’s acceptance.
(d) Conclusion
There is no consideration for this agreement, and neither party may enforce the contract.
No discussion of defenses is needed, because no defenses apply, and with or without
defenses, the contract is unenforceable.
Officer Brown v. Ed
Officer Brown will argue that a valid contract exists between Ed and him, bargained for and
supported by consideration. However, Ed and Officer Brown do not have an enforceable
contract.
Formation
Formation of a contract requires (1) a valid offer, (2) a valid acceptance of the offer, (3)
consideration or a substitute for consideration, and (4) a lack of valid defenses. These four
elements create an enforceable obligation.
(1) Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent (present intent to enter
into a bargain), communicated to the offeree in sufficiently clear and definite terms.
-7-
(a) Outward Manifestation of present contractual intent/communicated
to the offeree
Ed stated to Officer Brown that “[I]f you will drive by my house soon, and make sure
everything is OK, I’ll give you a free car wash tomorrow.” [emphasis added.] Ed manifested
present intent to enter into an agreement with Officer Brown.
(b) Terms
The terms of Ed’s offer are:
Quantity - One (1) of each performance
Time - Any reasonable time the day after the offer
Identity - Ed and Officer Brown
Price - Exchange of performances
Subject matter - Car Wash provided to Officer Brown/Protection of house provided to Ed
The offer is valid.
(2) Acceptance
At Common law, acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Officer Brown unequivocally stated that “I accept your kind offer.” Officer Brown manifested
intent to enter into a contract with Ed, by manifesting unequivocal assent to the terms of
the offer.
(3) Consideration
Consideration is bargained[-]for exchange of legal benefit and detriment, which induces the
parties to enter into the bargain.
(a) No Consideration
Ed will argue that no consideration supports the agreement, because Officer Brown was
under a preexisting legal duty to perform.
(b) Preexisting Legal Duty Rule
At common law, where one party has a preexisting legal duty to perform a certain
obligation, a promise to perform that obligation as already obliged, is not sufficient
consideration, on the theory that a party who agrees to perform a duty already owed is not
changing his actions in any way.
Because Officer Brown “began his routine patrol, which, as always, promptly took him by
Ed’s house,” and he made no effort to further secure the house than what he was legally
obligated to the police department and city to do, Officer Brown’s promised performance
is not consideration.
-8-
(c) Conclusion
There is no consideration to support this agreement, and Ed’s gratuitous promise may be
retracted at any time.
No discussion of defenses is needed, because no defenses apply, and with or without
defenses, the contract is unenforceable.
Charlie v Ed
Charlie will argue that a valid contract exists between Ed and him, bargained for and
supported. Charlie and Ed may have an enforceable contract under the doctrine of
promissory estoppel, or “detrimental reliance.”
Formation
Formation of a contract requires (1) a valid offer, (2) a valid acceptance of the offer, (3)
consideration or a substitute for consideration, and (4) a lack of valid defenses. These four
elements create an enforceable obligation.
(1) Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent (present intent to enter
into a bargain), communicated to the offeree in sufficiently clear and definite terms.
(a) Outward Manifestation of present contractual intent/communicated
to the offeree
Ed stated to Charlie that “I’ll give you a free car wash tomorrow.” Ed manifested present
intent to make a promise to Charlie. While this does not demonstrate present intent to
enter into a bargain, it demonstrates an offer sufficient to warrant discussion of a
consideration issue.
(b) Terms
The terms of Ed’s “offer” are:
Quantity - One (1)
Time - Any reasonable time the day after the offer
Identity - Ed and Charlie
Price - Free
Subject matter - Car Wash
The “offer” is valid.
(2) Acceptance
At Common law, acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Charlie unequivocally replied, “Thanks, I’ll take you up on that.”
-9-
(3) Consideration
Consideration is bargained[-]for exchange of legal benefit and detriment, which induces the
parties to enter into the bargain[.]
(a) No Consideration
Ed will argue that no consideration supports the agreement because Charlie promised
nothing in return, and nothing Charlie promised induced Ed or Charlie to enter into the
contract.
(b) Promissory Estoppel - Restatement §90
At Common Law, the doctrine of promissory estoppel is available to act as a substitute for
bargained[-]for consideration. Where it is foreseeable that a gratuitous promise will cause
reliance of a substantial character on the part of the offeree, and such justifiable reliance
of a substantial character on the part of the offeree, and such justifiable reliance does
occur, the promise will be enforce[d] to the extent necessary to prevent injustice.
(i)Reliance of a Substantial Character
Charlie will argue that he replied on the promise by leaving work and driving for one half
hour.
Depending on how much these two actions cost him (lack of pay, cost of gasoline, time
invested), his reliance may be of a “substantial character.[“]
(ii) Foreseeable Reliance
Ed may argue that Charlie’s reliance was not foreseeable. However, Charlie stated,
“Thanks, I’ll take you up on that,” and in doing so demonstrated to Ed that Ed should expect
Charlie to rely on the offer in some way.
It is arguable whether reliance “of a substantial character” is foreseeable.
(iii) Sufficient Substitute?
It is arguable that either argument will succeed, and either may probably win depending on
how a judge or jury decided to rule.
Conclusion
Alice and Officer Brown have no legal recourse against Ed.
Charlie may (or may not) have legal recourse in compensation for his detrimental reliance.
(c) Conclusion
There is no consideration to support this agreement, and Ed’s gratuitous promise may be
retracted at any time.
No discussion of defenses is needed, because no defenses apply, and with or without
-10-
defenses, the contract is unenforceable.
-11-
Question 2
Michael and his girlfriend Betty were going to an expensive nightclub. On their way to the
club Betty asked Michael to stop by the store where she worked as a checker. Michael
knew the store was closed but didn’t question why she wanted to stop. When they arrived
at the store they both got out of the car. Betty used her key to open the store’s door. They
both went in. Betty went to the cash register and took $200, intending to return it before
the store opened the next day. Michael saw her take the money. They then left the store.
When they got outside Michael asked Betty why she took the $200 from the cash register.
Betty told him that her employer owed her money and that she was taking it so that they
could have fun that evening. Michael did not believe that Betty was entitled to take the
money. Betty gave Michael the $200 and he put it in his pocket.
In fact, Betty was not entitled to take money from the cash register and she did not return
the $200 the next day. The store’s security system had filmed Betty’s and Michael’s actions
and both Betty and Michael were arrested.
1. With what crime or crimes can Betty be reasonably charged and what defenses, if any,
does Betty have available to her? Discuss.
2. With what crime or crimes can Michael be reasonably charged and what defenses, if
any, does Michael have available to him? Discuss.
-12-
Answer A to Question 2
2)
Question 2 - Criminal Law
Crimes against Betty
Issue 1 - Can Betty be charged with Burglary?
Burglary in common law is the breaking and entering [into] the dwelling of another with the
intent to commit a felony. Modern law has relaxed many of these elements. A breaking
is no longer required, opening an unlocked door or window is sufficient. The building does
not have to be a dwelling[;] it can be an office. And in some jurisdictions an intent to
commit any crime including misdemeanors is sufficient.
Here we have Betty entering the locked store where she worked as a checker. While [she]
did have access, she may not of [sic] been authorized to unlock the door and enter outside
of normal working hours. If not, then she did commit the breaking and entry requirement
element when she unlocked the door and entered the store. Under modern law, even
though this is a store, it would be sufficient for the dwelling element. Finally, her taking the
$200 which she intended to do would constitute a felony, larceny.
Betty has several defenses she can argue here. If the law in this jurisdiction follows the
strict common law definition of burglary, the store is not a dwelling place[;] therefore this
element is not satisfied and there is no burglary.
She can argue consent, by having a key and access to the store as an employee, she can
argue that the owner has consented to her entering the store.
She can also argue that she had no intent to commit a felony. To do this she would have
to convince the jury that she believed that the money was already owed to her and she was
simply retrieving what was already hers.
Considering all of these facts she will be charged with burglary.
Issue 2 - Can Betty be charged with Larceny?
Larceny is the trespassory taking of the personal property of another with the intent to
permanently deprive them of it.
Betty entered into the owner[’]s store, and took $200 of the owner[’]s money. Whether or
not she intended to permanently deprive the owner of [it] will be determined by the jury[;]
therefore the elements needed to charge Betty of Larceny are there in the facts.
She will argue that the money was owed to her and therefore she was entitled to retrieve
-13-
it, however the facts indicate that she was not entitled to the money.
She will also argue that there was no trespassory taking. Since she was authorized as an
employee as a checker with a key to the store she was in legal possession of the money
and therefore the trespassory taking element of Larceny is not satisfied.
Finally she can argue that she did not intent [sic] to permanently deprive the owner of the
money. Here the facts are not as clear as to whether or not she intended to keep the
money. The facts state that she did intend to return it, but again it[’]s a matter for the jury
to decide.
Most likely Betty will be charged with larceny.
Issue 3 - Can Betty be charged with Embezzlement?
Embezzlement is a larceny of personal property in which the actor is in legal possession
of.
If Betty is allowed the defense in the larceny charge, of already being in possession of the
money in the store due to her status as a checker and not simply a cleaning person or
stocker, she can be charged with embezzlement, if it can be proven that after taking the
money she intended to permanently deprive the owner of it.
Her defense here would be to show that she was going to return it and not permanently
deprive the owner of it.
Issue 4 - Can Betty be charged with Larceny by continuing trespass?
Another option in larceny, if Betty did in fact did [sic] intend to return the money, however
she later decided to keep it, is to charge her with Larceny by continuing trespass.
Her defense here would be that she did in fact intend to return it and that between the
taking and the time of her arrest there was insufficient time for her to do this.
Crimes against Michael
Issue 1 - Can Michael be charged with Accessory to the crime?
An accessory before the fact is one who helps or encourages another to commit a crime.
An accessory after the fact is one who helps one, whom he knows has committed a crime,
to keep from being arrested or prosecuted.
Here Michael drove Betty to the store when the store was closed[,] coupled with the fact
that Betty took money he didn’t believe belonged to her, it may be shown that he should
have known she was committing a crime and he was helping her.
His defense [is] lack of intent to help[.]
-14-
Issue 2 - Can Michael be charged with Receiving stolen property?
Receiving stolen property is a crime when the actor[,] knowing that the personal property
has been stolen, accepts the property into his possession with the intent to permanently
deprive the owner of it.
He didn’t believe the money belonged to [B]etty, therefore it must be stolen. He accepted
the money and put it in his pocket, and he didn’t return nor intend to return it, thereby
intending to permanently deprive the owner of it.
Defenses -
Mistake in fact - no intent to permanently deprive the owner
No knowledge that the money was stolen
-15-
Answer B to Question 2
2)
1. State v. Betty
Solicitation
Requesting, urging or tempting another to commit a crime, with the specific intent that the
solicitee commit a crime.
While Betty’s asking Michael “to stop by the store where she worked as a checker” would
be considered her requesting or urging him to commit a crime, since as discussed below,
at that point she did not have the specific intent to commit any crime, or she was mistaken
as to the actions she was taking, her asking Michael to come along would not be considered
a solicitation.
Conspiracy
An agreement between two or more people to commit a crime with the specific intent that
the crime be committed.
When Betty asked Michael to stop by the store where she worked, and Michael did so when
he knew the store was closed and didn’t question why she wanted to stop, this was not an
agreement to commit a crime because (discussed infra) at this point Betty did not intend to
commit any crime and Michael further did not agree to anything.
Thus, no conspiracy.
Burglary
A trespassory breaking and entering into the dwelling house of another, in the nighttime,
with the specific intent to commit a felony therein.
When Betty stopped by the store that she worked as a checker on the way to the nightclub,
and used her key to open the store’s door, she did not commit a trespassory or wrongful
entry, since as a checker, she had been entrusted with the keys. If Betty had the requisite
mens rea for the crime of burglary (discussed below), the entering would have been
considered wrongful by virtue of the fact that she entered by fraud, or for reasons not
reasonable [sic] related to her employment. As such, the fact that Betty entered the store
with her own keys even after store hours, would not constitute a wrongful entry. While we
may reasonably infer that it was the nighttime since she and Michael were “going to an
expensive night club”, since the store is not a dwelling house used for sleeping purposes,
common law burglary does not apply.
Statutory Burglary
Entry into any structure, at any time, with the specific intent to commit any crime or
misdemeanor within.
-16-
Modernly, a burglary does not require that the structure be used for sleeping purposes.
Because of this, entering into a store[,] at any time, would satisfy the structure requirement.
However, since Betty went to the cash register and took $200 “intending to return it before
the store opened the next day”, she did not have the specific intent to commit a felony
therein, namely the felony of larceny, since she did not intend to deprive the store of the
money permanently.
Thus, Betty may not be charged with either common law or statutory burglary.
Larceny
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with
the specific intent to permanently deprive, steal, or cause a substantial risk of loss to the
owner.
When Betty went to the cash register and “took $200", she obtained control and dominion
on the personal property of the store. Furthermore, when she left the store with the money,
she committed asportation of the money. The money was the personal property of the
store. However, since Betty told Michael that “her employer owed her the money and that
she was taking it so that they could have fun that evening”, she lacked the requis[i]te mental
state for the crime of larceny as she did not have the specific intent to permanently deprive.
Wrongful Trespass Doctrine
Although Betty may not have had the specific intent to permanently deprive when she
committed the actus reus, the physical act of removing the money from the store, under the
Wrongful Trespass Doctrine, there need not be concurrence of actus reus and mens rea,
if the mens rea is formed later. In this case, since Betty was actually “not entitled to take
the money from the cash register and she did not return the $200 the next day[“], there need
not be the concurrence of physical and mental state and the court may deem Betty as guilty
of larceny.
Thus, unless the court determines that the Wrongful Trespass Doctrine applies, Betty will
not be charged with larceny.
Embezzlement
Wrongful conversion of property rightfully possessed, with the specific intent to permanently
deprive or steal.
If the court believes Betty’s assertion of her being owed the $200, she may have been in
rightful possession of the $200 when she took it from the store. As such, when she “did not
return the $200 the next day”, she wrongfully converted the money at that point.
Thus, Betty may be charged with embezzlement.
-17-
Defenses
Mistake of Fact - reasonable
Mistake of fact will be a defense for specific intent crimes such as larceny and
embezzlement, if the facts, as the defendant thought them to be, did not constitute a crime.
While Betty will attempt to invoke mistake of fact as a defense, since she thought that she
was taking money that was owed to her, if she is charged with larceny, this may negate the
mental state because it is not the crime of larceny to take property that rightfully belongs to
you. However, this defense will not work for embezzlement since wrongfully converting
property in one’s rightful possession is a crime.
2. State v. Michael
Conspiracy
defined above
Since Betty did not believe that she was committing a crime, there was no agreement by
Michael to commit any crime.
Thus, Michael is not liable for conspiracy.
Accomplice
One who aids, counsels, or encourages another to commit a crime with the specific intent
to aid that crime.
Once again, since Betty did not commit a burglary, and likely did not commit a larceny,
Michael[’]s driving her to the store would not constitu[t]e aid or encouragement. Even
though intent may be found by what stake a person has in the outcome, and in this case
Michael would benefit since Betty took $200 so that they could have fun, there was still no
intent to help in committing the crime.
Accessory after the fact
Aiding another knowing that she has committed a felony, for the purpose of helping the
defendant to escape arrest, trial or punishment.
When Michael did not believe the [sic] Betty was entitled to the money and when at that
point he did not do anything to stop Betty from taking the money, and he did not notify the
authorities, he may be charged with being an accessory after the fact. As such, he will not
be liable for the underlying crimes of larceny and embezzlement committed by Betty.
Misprision
Concealment and non-disclosure of known felonious conduct of another.
When Michael knew that Betty had taken money that did not belong to her, and he did not
-18-
tell the authorities or even tell her to stop, when he put it (the money) in his pocket, he
concealed the known felonious conduct of Betty.
Receiving Stolen Property
Receiving control or possession over stolen property, knowing it to be stolen, with the
specific intent to permanently deprive.
When after Betty told Michael that she was taking money that she felt was owed to her, and
Michael “did not believe that Betty was entitled to the money”, when he subsequently “put
it in his pocket”, he received control or possession over the money. Since they were
planning on spending the money at the club, he specifically intended to permanently deprive
the store of the money.
Defenses
Defenses
Mistake of fact
defined above
While Michael will assert the defense of fact, the “fact” remains that he was not mistaken
about any fact, and Betty, in truth, did commit the crimes that Michael thought she did, as
is indicated by Betty’s not being entitled to take the money and her not returning it the
following day.
-19-
Question 3
David drives a parcel delivery van. On Monday, while delivering packages in a residential
neighborhood, David struck and badly damaged a parked car owned by Able. At the time
of the collision, David was driving 30 mph. The posted speed limit for the street is 25 mph,
but residents customarily drive at 30 mph.
On Tuesday, David left a package for Baker on the front step outside of her house. He
placed the package just in front of the doorway, and when Baker walked out of her house
later in the day, she tripped over the package, breaking her hip.
On Wednesday, while returning to his van following a delivery, David stopped to chat with
Carl, who was sitting in his car and about to back out of his driveway. When they finished
speaking, Carl began to back out of the driveway. At that moment, David saw a car
speeding down the street towards Carl. David considered warning Carl of the approaching
car, but since David was in a hurry, he decided not to go back and tell him. As Carl backed
out of his driveway, he was struck by the speeding motorist and was seriously injured.
Able, Baker, and Carl have all filed lawsuits against David.
What is David’s liability to each of them? Discuss.
-20-
Answer A to Question 3
3)
1. ABLE v. DAVID
Negligence
A duty to conform to a standard of care, the breach of which is the actual and proximate
cause of plaintiff’s damages.
Duty
Generally there is a duty to all foreseeable plaintiffs to act as a reasonable, prudent person
under the circumstances.
Here, David is required [to] act as a reasonable, prudent delivery person driving in a
residential neighborhood. He should be aware of parked cars and the possibility of hitting
them. He has a duty to drive carefully.
Foreseeable Plaintiff
Since Able lives in the neighborhood and had his car parked there, he is a foreseeable
plaintiff.
Breach
An unjustified failure to live up to the standard of care.
Here, David struck Able’s parked car. The question is whether he was negligent and failed
in his duty.
Negligence Per Se
If a statute has a penalty for its violation and proscribes the conduct expected and the
statute is designed to prevent the type of harm caused by defendant and protect the class
of plaintiff harmed by defendant, the statutory duty will be substituted for the common law
duty. Its breach is negligence per se.
Here, David broke a speeding statute that proscribed an expected conduct of 25 mph (David
was driving 30 mph). In addition, the statute would obviously have a penalty (a speeding
ticket) and it is designed to protect persons or property owners that may be harmed by
speeders (type of harm and class of plaintiffs).
Therefore, David is negligent per se.
-21-
Causation
Actual Cause
“But for” David’s speeding, Able’s car would not have been damaged how and when it was.
Proximate Cause
David’s speeding and hitting Able’s car was foreseeable and there were no intervening
events that would break the chain of causatio[n]. The damages flowed naturally from the
car being hit.
Damages
General Damages (pain and suffering)
Here, there is no personal injury to Able.
Therefore, there is no recovery for pain and suffering.
Special Damages-Pecuniary losses
Here, Able will be able to recover for his property damages (his car was badly damaged).
He will recover for any repairs or for total loss of car if that is the case.
Defenses
Comparative Negligence
A plaintiff’s recovery will be reduced by his degree of fault. In some jurisdictions, the plaintiff
will be barred from recovery unless his degree of fault is “less serious than” (49%) or[,] in
others, “not more serious than” (50%) the defendant’s fault.
Here, there is no indication that Able had any degree of fault.
Therefore there will be no reduction in Able’s recovery.
Contributory Negligence
In some jurisdictions, a plaintiff may be completely barred from recovery if he contributes
in the least to the harm.
Here, there is no indication that Able contributed in the least to the accident.
Therefore, there will be no reduction in his recovery.
Assumption of Risk
A plaintiff may be completely barred if he knowingly and voluntarily assumes the risk of the
accident.
Here, there is no indication that Able knew of the risk to his car or voluntarily assumed it.
-22-
Therefore, his recovery will not be barred due to assumption of risk.
2. BAKER v. DAVID
Negligence
Defined supra.
Duty
Defined supra.
Here, David had a duty to foreseeable plaintiffs to act as a reasonable, prudent delivery
person.
Foreseeable Plaintiff
Here, since Baker is receiving a package from David and will be coming out of the house
through that door, he is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Breach
An unjustified failure of defendant to conform his conduct to the duty owed.
Here, David acted unreasonably and without proper precaution. He should have anticipated
that the resident, Baker, would be coming out the door and might not see the package that
is “just in front of the doorway.”
Therefore, David breached his duty owed to Baker.
Causation
Actual Cause
“But for” David’s placing the package “just in front of the doorway”, Baker would not have
been injured (broken her hip) as when and how she was.
Proximate Cause
It was foreseeable that someone coming through that door would not see the package and
would trip over it and be injured (such as breaking a hip). There were no intervening events
between David’s placing the package in front of the door and Baker’s tripping that would
break the chain of causation. There was no superseding event.
Damages
General Damages
Defined supra.
Here, Baker broke her hip. This must have been very painful and she will suffer through a
period of rehabilitation. Depending on her age, she may even need a hip replacemen[t]
(further suffering.)
Special Damages
-23-
Defined supra.
Here, Baker will need medical attention. She may also lose time from work (lost wages) and
suffer other pecuniary losses.
Therefore, Baker will recover for her pecuniary losses.
Defenses
Comparative negligence
Defined supra.
Here, there is no indication that Baker had any degree of fault. Although David may claim
that Baker should have looked where he was going, the facts do not indicate that Baker was
unreasonable or imprudent in his actions under the circumstances.
Therefore, there will be no reduction in her recovery.
Contributory Negligence
Defined supra.
As stated above there is no indication that Baker had any degree of fault. Therefore, she
will not be barred from recovery.
Assumption of Risk
Defined supra.
There is no indication that Baker voluntarily assumed and [sic] known risk.
Damages
Damages and defenses will be as discussed above under negligence.
3. CARL v. David
Negligence
Defined supra.
Duty
Defined supra.
A duty is owed if there is some relationship that requires a duty (such as parent to child or
between spouses) or by contract, or by statute or[,] if there is an assumption of care or a
creation of peril. This is especially true in an act of omission.
Here, there was an act of omission by David (didn’t warn Carl). However, David did not owe
Carl a duty. The facts do not indicate he was related to Carl, that he had any contractual
duty to warn Carl, or that there was a statute that required him to do so. In addition, David
-24-
did not create the peril (didn’t cause the speeding car) and did not assume any care of Carl
which he then abandoned (he did not prevent others from helping Carl).
Therefore, David will have no liability as to Carl.
-25-
Answer B to Question 3
3)
Negligence
Negligence is a failure to execute that degree of care a reasonable person would exercise
in the same or similar circumstances[.]
Able v. David
A plaintiff (¶) in a negligence action must establish as a prima facie case: duty, breach,
causation actual and proximate, and damages.
1. Duty
Generally one does not owe any duty to another, but duty can arise by statute, contract,
assumption, relationship or peril.
Under Palsgraf, Cardozo argued that where duty arises from peril a defendant’s action can
put a ¶ in peril if he (¶) is foreseeable and in the zone of danger. Andrews argued if there
was a duty to any one there was a duty to all[.]
Here David has placed A. in peril because he is driving a van and A’s car is parked on a
street in the zone of danger where D’s van is likely to be driving[.] Therefore, D owes a duty
of reasonable care to A and his property.
2. Breach - Did D breach his duty to A?
Breach is a failure to exercise reasonable care. Where there is a statute usually safety
related – that has been violated it is negligence per se. A statute must:
1. be clearly defined
2. the ¶ must be in a class intended to be protected by the statute
3. the harm done was that type that the statute included be present
4. the D. was not excused by necessity
Here there is presumably a speeding statute because there is a posted speed limit of 25
mph. The ¶, A[,] is clearly in the protected class because his auto is subject to accident
from speeding cars. The harm (vehicle damage) was what [the] statute intended to protect
and D had no legitimate excuse. Therefore D has breached his duty to A.
3. Causation - Actual
Actual causation means that “but for” the D’s act, ¶ would not have suffered damage. Here
but for D’s striking A’s car A would not have been damaged[.]
-26-
Proximate Cause means that defendant’s acts were not so far removed in time or space and
were direct and foreseeable that the law would impose liability for ¶ damage.
Here D’s driving and striking A’s car was the direct cause, unbroken by any intervening
event, that caused A’s car to be damaged.
Therefore the causation element has been satisfied[.]
4. Damages
A has suffered actual damages because his car was “struck and badly damaged.”
5. Contributory/Comparative Negligence
Where a ¶’s negligence contributes to his injuries he can be barred from recovery in a
strictly contributory neg. jurisdiction or have his recovery reduced in proportion to his own
negligence.
Here there is no evidence from the facts that A had carelessly parked the car[.] Therefore
D probably could not raise this Defense[.]
Baker v. D
1. Did D owe a duty to Baker[?]
D has placed B in peril by his act because he’s placing the package is [sic] in the zone of
danger of where B is likely to be and it is foreseeable that B would be walking out his front
door.
2. Breach –
D’s failure to act with reasonable care by placing the packages just in front of the doorway
instead of off to the side would probably breach his duty to B[.]
3. Cause - Actual
“But for” the package being in front of the door B would not have tripped over it[.]
The package is the direct cause of B’s tripping[,] therefore it is the proximate cause[.]
4. Damages
B has suffered damages because she “broke her hip[.]”
5. Contrib. Negligence (C/N)
defined above - Here it is arguable that B was negligent in not looking around before walking
out the door[.] Therefore her damages could be barred or reduced depending on the
jurisdiction[.]
Carl v. D
There is no affirmative duty to act so D would not be liable to Carl for failing to warn him of
-27-
the car. If[,] however[,] there were a special relationship (i.e. child) there would be a duty[.]
Conclusion
D is liable in a negligence action to A[.]
D is probably liable on a pro rata basis to B[.]
D is not liable to C[.]
-28-
Question 4
GravelCo is a distributor of high quality gravel used on construction projects. In August,
GravelCo found itself with more gravel than it could easily store. On August 15, GravelCo’s
sales director sent a fax on company stationary with GravelCo’s logo at the top and the
sales director’s name printed just beneath it to Builder, GravelCo’s biggest customer. The
entire text of the fax stated, “Because of an oversupply, we are offering to sell up to 5000
tons of high-quality gravel at $8 per ton, full payment due on delivery. We can guarantee
this price for only thirty days.”
On August 17, the purchasing agent for Builder faxed back a response stating, “We do not
wish to order at $8 per ton, but would consider a purchase at $7 per ton.”
On September 1, a railroad strike caused a gravel shortage and an immediate rise in the
market price for gravel. On September 5, GravelCo entered into several contracts with
major contractors to sell large quantities of gravel at $11 a ton.
On September 7, GravelCo received an overnight letter from Builder signed by its
purchasing agent. The letter stated, “We accept your offer for 5000 tons of gravel at $8 per
ton. Terms attached.” Attached to the letter was Builder’s standard purchase order form,
one of the terms of which stated that payment would be made within 90 days after delivery
of the purchased product.
In order to deliver 5000 tons of gravel to Builder, GravelCo would now be forced to purchase
some of the gravel on the open market at over $10 a ton.
1. Is GravelCo obligated to sell 5000 tons of gravel to Builder at $8 per ton? Discuss.
2. If GravelCo is bound to sell the gravel to Builder, can Builder be required to make full
payment upon delivery? Discuss.
-29-
Answer A to Question 4
4)
Since this question involves the sale of goods it will be governed by the UCC.
Is Gravelco obligated? Gravelco would be obligated to sell Builder 5000 tons of gravel at
$8 per pound if there was an enforceable contract in place. The formation of any contract
requires mutual assent (valid offer and acceptance) supported by consideration with no legal
defenses.
Gravelco’s Offer: A valid offer is manifestation of a willingness to be bound which is
communicated by the offeror to the offeree, contains all the essential terms (product, price,
time for performance [,] etc[.] and creates the power of acceptance in the offeree. Here
Gravelco’s sales director sent Builder a signed, written offer stating all of the essential terms
(gravel, for $8 per ton, payment due on delivery and good for 30 days). This would
constitute a valid offer[.]
Builder’s rejection: A valid acceptance occurs if the offeree communicates his acceptance
of the terms of the offer to the offeror, in the manner and time frame specified by the
offeror[;] however, in its first communication Builder replied back to Gravelco stating that
they “did not wish to order at $8 per ton but would consider a purchase at $7 per ton.[“]
Builder did not accept the terms in Gravelco’s offer and in fact rejected those terms and
made a counteroffer of $7 per ton. No contract was formed because Builder did not accept
the offer.
Builder’s acceptance: See rule above. In its 2nd communication, Builder sent a signed letter
and purchase order to Gravelco stating that they accepted their offer for 5000 tons at $8 per
ton and that payment would be made within 90 days of delivery. The issue is whether or not
the offer was still open at the time of acceptance.
Merchant’s firm offer rule: Under the UCC a merchant[‘]s firm offer is valid for up to 90 days
if in writing and signed by the merchant. Here, we know that Gravelco’s offer was in writing
(although it’s not clear if it was signed it will likely qualify because the sales director[‘]s name
was printed and it was on company letterhead). In the offer, Gravelco expressly stated that
the offer was only open for 30 days so Builder would have needed to respond within that
time frame. The letter from Gravelco was sent on August 15th and Buildco responded on
Sept. 7th that they accept[ed] the offer so they were within the 30 day limit.
The issue is whether or not the offer was terminated by Builder’s rejection on August 17th.
An offer is terminated if it is rejected by the offeree. Here Builder clearly stated that they did
not “wish to place an order at $8 per ton”. That would constitute a rejection of the offer.
Had they said that they were not sure if they wanted to make a purchase then Gravelco
would be obligated to hold the offer open for 30 days. The offer was no longer valid at the
time of [B]uilder’s acceptance.
-30-
Defenses to the contract:
If for some reason it is determined that the offer was still open at the time of Builder’s
acceptance, Gravelco might be able to defend based on impracticability. Impracticability
can come into play where some unforeseeable, intervening event makes performance
extremely difficult (although technically possible) and where neither party assumed the risk.
Here we know that there was a railroad strike [that] created a gravel shortage and caused
an immediate rise in the market price of gravel. Generally a market increase in price will not
be considered an unforeseeable event but the fact that it was a railroad strike that caused
it might allow Gravelco to make that argument. However, if Gravelco should have been
aware that there was the possibility of a railroad strike that would impact the cost of gravel
they will not be able to establish impracticability as a defense to the contract.
Payment Terms: Again, if for some reason it is determined that the offer was still open at the
time of Builder’s acceptance then the issue is when Builder is obligated to pay for the gravel.
Gravelco’s original offer stated that payment was due upon delivery and Builder’s
acceptance stated that payment would be made in 90 days from delivery.
Battle of the forms: Under the UCC when both parties are merchants as is the case here
and there are additional terms both parties[‘] terms will be included in the agreement.
However, where there are conflicting terms the conflicting term (net 90 [day] payment terms)
must be agreed to. However, courts can look to a course of dealings between the two
companies to determine if there is implied agreement on the term. Here we know that
Gravelco and Builder had done business in the past and, in fact, Builder was Gravelco’s
biggest customer. If[,] historically, Builder has paid in 90 days and Gravelco has never
objected previously then Buildco’s payment is due in 90 days.
-31-
Answer B to Question 4
4)
GRAVEL CO. (G) vs. BUILDER (B)
Is Gravel Co. obligated to Sell 5000 tons @ $8 per ton?
A contract is a promise or set of promises the performance of which the law will treat as a
duty and for the breach of which the law will remedy. The rights and remedies available to
the parties depend on whether a valid contract existed. Every contract is based on Offer,
Acceptance & Consideration.
UCC or Common Law?
The UCC governs contracts for the sale of goods (movable, tangible items identifiable at the
time of the contract)[;] otherwise common law governs.
Here, G&B contracted for the sale of gravel, which is a movable and tangible good.
Therefore, the UCC, Article 2 governs.
MERCHANTS
Under the UCC, a merchant is one who regularly deals with or holds out as [being]
knowledg[e]able in the goods of the contract[.]
G is a distributor of gravel and as such is knowledg[e]able in gravel. B is ordering 5000 tons
of gravel, which shows B is also knowledg[e]able in gravel.
Therefore, B&G are Merchants and will be held to merchandise standards under the UCC.
Firm Offer - UCC2-205?
Under UCC2-205, a firm offer is a signed, written offer by a merchant which holds itself open
for a stated time (not to exceed 90 days). A firm offer is irrevocable for the stated time.
Unlike common law options, no consideration is required for a firm offer.
Here, G made a written offer to B which was held open because it said G would sell 5000
tons of gravel to B and would guarantee the price for 30 days. This was from a merchant
because G is a merchant.
G will argue the offer isn’t signed, and therefore can’t be a UCC2-205 firm offer.
B will argue G’s logo at the top of the fax, and the sales director’s name at the bottom are
-32-
sufficient to meet the signature requirement.
Therefore, G made a Firm Offer under UCC2-205.
OFFER by G
An offer is a communication of present contractual intent which a reasonably objective
person understands assent would form a bargain. Under the UCC, the offer must be clear
and definite as to quantity and parties[;] the other terms can be replaced by UCC gap fillers.
G made a communication of contractual intent to B because G offered to sell gravel to B.
A reasonable person would understand assent would form a bargain because B could
accept within 30 days. The UCC requirements for clear quantity - 5000 tons and parties -
B&G are met.
Therefore, G made a valid offer[;] this was an irrevocable firm offer as discussed above[.]
Rejection by B on 8/17?
A rejection is a statement by the offeree they do not accept the offer. A counteroffer is an
implied rejection.
G may argue B’s fax on 8/17 was a rejection because it stated “we do not wish to purchase
at $8/ton.” B will argue the language in their fax was vague, and merely a statement of their
“wish”, not contractual intent. B can further argue a reasonable person reading the fax
wouldn’t understand it was a rejection because B’s statement was only a “wish.”
Therefore, B did not reject G’s firm offer.
Acceptance by B on Sept. 7?
Under UCC2-206, an acceptance can be made by any reasonable means after a reasonable
time. Quantity and Parties must be clear and definite.
B can show they accepted G’s offer because they stated in the 9/7 letter “We accept your
offer[.]”
Quantity & Parties are clear and definite – 5000 tons and G&B.
B can show they accepted by reasonable means – letter, in a reasonable time – within the
30 days mentioned by G.
B’s acceptance did contain terms which differed from G’s offer. However, under UCC2-207,
a seasonable expression of acceptance with varying terms can be effective. The varying
terms may be objected to by the offeror.
-33-
Therefore, B made a valid acceptance for 5000 tons of gravel at $8/ton.
STATUTE OF FRAUDS - UCC2-201
The UCC2-201 requires contracts for the sale of goods over $500 in value must be in
writing, signed by the party against whom it is to be enforced.
Here, G sent B a fax with the terms of the contract with company logo & a sales director’s
name. B sent a signed letter accepting G’s offer[.]
Therefore, the UCC2-201 writing requirement is met.
CONSIDERATION
B gave G a promise to pay $8/ton in exchange for G’s shipment of gravel.
Therefore, a valid exchange of legal detriment can be shown because both parties must give
performance in exchange for return performance.
Therefore, a valid contract exists based on offer, acceptance and consideration.
FRUSTRATION OF PURPOSE
Frustration of purpose excuses performance when an essential purpose for the contract
(known to both parties) becomes an implied condition and is frustrated by unforeseeable
events beyond the parties[‘] control.
Here, G may argue the unexpected rise in gravel prices and the sale by G to other
distributors frustrated the purpose of the contract. G will argue B&G knew the reason for
the contract’s existence was G’s oversupply because G said to B “because of an
oversupply....” in their original offer. This oversupply was frustrated when G sold the gravel
elsewhere.
B can argue G’s frustration was within their control because they didn’t have to sell to other
parties.
Therefore, because G could control its oversupply by not selling to other parties, B can show
frustration or purpose doesn’t apply.
IMPOSSIBILITY/COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY?
A party is excused from performance when events beyond their control make performance
objectively impossible or extremely commercially impractical.
B will argue G had control over keeping the gravel and shouldn’t be excused from
performance because G sold the gravel elsewhere. Also, B will argue it isn’t objectively
-34-
impossible for G to perform because they can still ship gravel to B, even if it is more
expensive.
Therefore, G cannot assert impossibility or commercial impracticability.
Therefore, for the facts and legal reasoning discussed, G is obligated to sell 5000 tons of
gravel at $8/ton because G & B had a valid, enforceable contract.
Ï Can G require B [to] make full payment upon delivery?
UCC2-207 - ACCEPTANCE varying from OFFER
As previously mentioned, an Acceptance which is a seasonable expression of acceptance
can contain varying terms from the offer provided the acceptance is between merchants
and: ÎThe offer doesn’t expressly limit itself to its terms Ï The offeror doesn’t object to the
new terms äThe acceptance isn’t conditioned upon accepting the new terms and Ñ The
new terms don’t materially affect the offer.
Here, G will argue the term B changed regarding payment after 90 days materially altered
the offer because it changed when G was to be paid.
Using the Knockout Rule, the court would likely knock out the varying term and replace it
with a UCC Gap Filler. Or the court can enforce G’s original term regarding payment made
due on delivery.
Therefore, G may be able to require immediate payment, or the court will knock out the
contradicting terms and replace with a reasonable UCC Gap Filler.























ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2006 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS’ EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2006 California First-Year Law
Students’ Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the
examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in
spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here
with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the
essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number Subject Page
1. Torts 1
2. Contracts 13
3. Criminal Law 24
4. Torts 36
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the
difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and
fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand
the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their
relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason
in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not
merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your
proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit.
State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal
doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general
application.
-1-
Question 1
A state statute requires motorcyclists to wear a safety helmet while riding, and is enforced
by means of citations and fines. Having mislaid his helmet, Adam jumped on his
motorcycle without one and went riding down the street. Barb, who was driving her car in
the opposite direction on the same street, briefly looked down to get her sunglasses, which
had dropped to the floor. At that moment a bee landed on Adam’s head. In attempting to
brush it away, he lost control of the motorcycle. The motorcycle fell and went sliding over
the double line into Barb’s lane with Adam pinned beneath it. When Barb retrieved her
sunglasses and looked ahead, she saw that the motorcycle was sliding towards her, going
the wrong way in her lane. She abruptly turned her wheel to avoid hitting it, crossed over
the double line, and collided head-on with a truck that was approaching her at twice the
posted speed limit. The truck, owned and driven by Dave, was badly damaged in the
collision, as was Barb’s car. Barb was seriously injured when the force of the collision
threw her against her own seat belt, breaking her sternum.
On what theory or theories might damages be recovered, and what defenses might
reasonably be raised in actions by:
1. Barb against Adam? Discuss.
2. Barb against Dave? Discuss.
-2-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
Q-1
Torts
Barb v. Adam
Negligence Per Se - See under Breach. (defined intra)
Crossing the double line - excusable
NEGLIGENCE
Negligence where a duty is owed and that duty is breached and that breach is the actual
and proximate cause of plaintiff[’]s damages.
Here Barb will argue that Adam owed her a general duty of due care to act as a reasonable
person and prevent foreseeable harm or injury by driving in a safe and appropriate manner.
Moreover[,] Barb will assert that Adam owed a duty to follow the rules of the road.
Breach
Because Adam failed to wear his helmet[,] Barb will argue Negligence Per Se[;] a violation
of statute in California creates a rebuttable presumption of negligence.
A state statute required a motorcyclist to wear a safety helmet while riding. The intent of
the legislature was to protect the motorcyclist from head injures from accidents. Adam is
a motorcyclist. Here the legislat[ion] intended to protect him[,] not Barb. The classification
is motorcyclist which Adam not Barb is. The type of injury is a head injury of a motorcyclist
and passenger.
There is no negligence per se as it is not the type of injury (“a bee sting”) the legislature is
trying to prevent.
Barb will argue that Adam failed to control his motorcycle and he owed her a foreseeable
general duty of due care as a motorcyclist to stay on the appropriate side of the road.
Adam[,] after being landed on by a bee[,] brushed it away and lost control of his vehicle,
breaching his duty of due care to drive safely and to maintain control of his bike and drive
on his side of the road. Adam lost control of the bike[,] fell and skidded over the double
line[,] a violation of statute[,] causing Barb to swerve and strike Dave[’]s truck. It is the
intent of the legislator to protect other motorist[s] from injury[.] Both are motorists and
suffer the type of injury injuring herself and Dave’s property.
There is a breach.
-3-
Causation
Actual Causation
But for Adam loosing [sic] control of his bike and crossing the double line[,] Barb would not
have been injured. Adam is a substantial factor of her injuries.
There is actual causation.
Proximate Causation
It is foreseeable that when one loses control of a motorcycle and fails to (not cross) the
double lines[,] which is a violation of statute negligence per se[,] that it would cause Barb
to swerve in avoidance of striking Adam and his bike causing an accident with Dave. Adam
was the proximate cause of her accident[.]
There is proximate causation.
Damages
Barb suffered personal injury of a broken sternum and was seriously injured. Her car was
bad[l]y damaged[.]
Defenses
Contributory Negligence
When a plaintiff has a responsibility to act with conduct of a certain standard and fails to
hold at or above that level of conduct and contributes to his or her own injury.
Here, Adam will argue that Barb[’]s own negligence caused her injuries. Barb by looking
down at the floor to get her sunglasses placed herself in jeopardy of accident[.] Here Barb
failed to hold to the conduct required of drivers to drive safely and keep the[ir] eyes on the
road.
Barb will argue it is normal to avert eyes [on] dropping.
There is contribut[or]y negligence. In some states it is a Complete Bar to Recovery.
Comparative Negligence
Comparative negligence is an appointment of fault and will affect the recovery of the parties
depe[n]d[in]g on the type of comparative negligence the[re] must be under 50% in order to
recover.
-4-
Adam will assert: By swerving and crossing into Dave[’]s path here Barb looked at the floor
and averted her eyes from the road. Barb has a percentage of fault in the accident. Barb
will argue it was brief and would not have mattered. The courts will decide if there is
comparative negligence.
This is comparative negligence.
Assumption of the Risk
Knowing the dangers and being fully aware and accept[in]g the risk is a defense under
Assumption of the Risk[.]
Here Adam will argue that Barb drove know[in]g there are dangers out on the road and
the[re] are accidents that happens[sic][.] She had full and complete knowledge.
Barb will counter that she was unaware of Adam[’]s bee incident and who knows when an
accident will occur? She could not have complete knowledge.
There is no assumption of the risk based on Barb’s lack of knowledge and accepta[n]ce of
Adam’s driv[in]g skills.
Damages/Remedies
General Damages
Barb will seek to recover her past[,] present[,] and future pay and suffering[.] In some states
she may recover economic loss of her car. (May reduce future to recover).
Special Damages
Barb will seek to recover any certain and foreseeable losses related to her lost wages [and]
medical bills. (provable expenses)
Nominals
To assert plaintiff[’]s rights
There will be no nominals because of the type of accident. If there is it will be small.
Punitive Damages
To punish for malicious or wantonly reckless or intentional behavior.
There will be no punitives unless there is wanton recklessness.
-5-
As there appears to be joint tortfeasance[,] Dave speed[in]g and Adam recklessness[,] she
may seek dam[a]ges from both. However[,] her total damages may not exceed the amount
by collecting each successive tortfeasor[;] may seek injury from each other or contributions.
Barb v. Dave
Negligence per se
Defined supra.
Here, Dave violated the posted speed limit. Under negligence per se the legislature
intended the speed limit to protect from car accidents. The type of injury intended to
prevent to motorists Dave & Barb, both parties with the characteristics of parties injured.
Here Dave may be found to have created a rebuttable presumption of neglige[nc]e under
CA law.
There is neglige[nc]e per se.
Dave will assert that Barb crossed the line and struck him. His speed would not matter and
for severity of injury, not causing the accident.
Duty
Defined supra.
Here Barb will assert that Dave owed a general duty of due care to drive within the speed
limit. A reasonable driver would foresee that speeding may cause serious injuries and
inability to avoid accidents.
Breach
Defined supra.
Here Dave drove at twice the speed limit. A reasonable person would foresee that
speed[in]g would breach a general duty of due care to other drivers like Barb. Dave
breached his duty and the neglige[n]ce per se created a rebuttable presumption of
negligence, violating the speed limit.
Dave will assert that speeding limit [sic] was designed to control avoidable accidents and
that Barb swervy[sic] over the double line, here she created the accident and breached her
duty to Dave.
-6-
Actual Causation
But for Dave violat[in]g the speed limit Barb would not have been severely injured in the
head[-]on collision[.] Dave is a substantial factor in Barb’s injures.
There is Actual Causation[.]
Proximate Causation
It is reasonably forseeable that Dave[’]s speeding was the legal and proximate cause of
Barb[’]s severe injuries.
There is proximate causation.
Damages
Defined supra.
Defenses
Contribut[or]y Neglige[nc]e
Defined Supra
Dave will argue that Barb crossed th[e] double lines and that she contributed to her own
injures by fail[in]g to keep her eyes on the road and swer[vi]ng to avoid [w]recking by
en[ter]ing into an oncoming lane & crossing double lines. A driver owes a conduct of due
care to stay in her lane and drive defensively with their eyes on the road. Barb failed to do
this and contributed to her accident.
There is contributory negligence.
Comparative Negligence
Defined Supra.
Here Barb contributed to her injuries defined infra in contribut[or]y negligence.
There is comparative negligence.
Last Clear Chance.
Barb will argue in her defense that Dave had [the] last clear chance to avoid the accident
but failed to do so because he was speeding.
-7-
There is no Last Clear Chance.
Ass[u]mpti[on] of the risk
Defined Infra
There is not assumption of the risk. Dave did not know Barb would have an accident and
not give up her offer.
Generals
Defined supra.
Barb may recover general damages for her suff[er]i[n]g past present and future reduced
for Adam.
Specials
Defined supra.
Several
Defined supra.
Punitives
Defined supra.
-8-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
Q-1
1. BARB v. ADAM
NEGLIGENCE
Duty to conform to a standard of care and breach of duty is the actual and proximate cause
of plaintiff[’]s damages.
DUTY
FORESEEABLE PLAINTIFF
Here, Barb was driving on a road shared by fellow motorists including Adam, which puts
her in the zone of danger should Adam not drive safely. Therefore Barb is a foreseeable
plaintiff.
STANDARD OF CARE
Under these circumstances, Adam had a duty to act as a reasonably prudent driver while
sharing the road with other drivers.
BREACH
Where the defendant’s conduct falls short of the required standard of care applicable and
owed to plaintiff.
Here, Adam’s conduct of brushing away a bee from his head jeopardized the safety of
Barb, which fell short of a reasonably prudent driver.
VIOLATION OF STATUTE
Where the[re] is a statute [of] specific duty, it replaces the more general standard of care
and a violation of such statute establishes a brea[c]h.
Here, Adam violated the state statute by not wearing a safety helmet while driving a
motorcycle.
The statute[,] enforced by means of citations and fines, clearly establishes a criminal
penal[t]y. Further, the statute clearly defined the conduct required as wearing a safety
helmet while driving a motorcycle. However, the statute-specific duty was not established
to protect fellow motorists such as Joan. Rather, the statute was designed to protect the
driver of the motorcyclist [sic].
-9-
Therefore, Adam’s violation of statute does not establish a brea[c]h. Adam did, however,
breach the more general duty owed to Barb (defined/discussed supra.)
CAUSATION
ACTUAL CAUSE
But for Adam attempting to brush away a bee and losing control of his motorcycle, Barb
would not have been injured how and when she was.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
When a bee landed on Adam’s head and he attempted to brush it away, it was foreseeable
that he could lose control of his motorcycle. Between Adam’s act of brushing away the bee
and losing control of his motorcycle there were no intervening events to break the chain of
causation leading to Barb’s collision with Dave.
DAMAGES
GENERAL DAMAGES
Barb will be entitled to general damages for any pain and suffering caused by Adam’s act
of sliding into her lane[,] resulting in her attempt to avoid a collision with him.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
Barb will be entitled to special damages for any medical bills as a result of her broken
sternum and any other injuries caused by this collision. Also, Barb is entitled to special
damages for any lost wages.
PROPERTY DAMAGES
Barb is entitled to the cost to repair her car of [sic] the reasonable value of her car if it was
totally destroyed.
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Here, if the court determines that Barb’s conduct fell short of a reasonably prudent driver
by briefing [sic] looking down to get her sunglasses that had dropped to the floor, this would
be a total bar to recovery in contributory negligence jurisdictions.
-10-
LAST CLEAR CHANCE DOCTRINE
However, an exception would be made if Adam was found to have had the last clear
chance to avoid the accident.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
In comparative negligence jurisdiction’s [sic] Barb and Adam’s percentage of degree of fault
would be determined and damages would be paid accordingly.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Barb did not willingly, knowingly or unreasonably assume any risk by sharing the road with
Adam as she had no way to know a bee would land on Adam’s head[,] causing him to
swerve into her lane.
JOINT & SEVERAL LIABILITY
On these facts, Adam and Dave will be joint and severally liable for Barb’s injuries[;]
therefore, both are responsible for her total damages.
CONTRIBUTION
Adam may also seek contribution from Dave if he pays more damages than he was
required.
2. BARB v. DAVE
NEGLIGENCE
Defined supra.
DUTY
FORESEEABLE PLAINTIFF
Because Barb shared the road with Dave, she was in the zone of danger should Dave’s
driving put her at risk. Therefore, Barb is a foreseeable plaintiff.
STANDARD OF CARE
Here, Dave had a duty to drive as a reasonably prudent driver under the circumstances of
sharing the road with fellow drivers.
-11-
BREACH
Defined supra.
Here, when Dave drove twice the posted speed limit[,] putting his fellow drivers[,] including
Barb[,] at risk, he breached his duty.
VIOLATION OF STATUTE
Defined supra.
Here, a statute established a criminal penalty for speeding. Further, a statute clearly
defined conduct expected as half the speed Dave was driving. And finally, the statute was
designed to protect both Dave and fellow drivers such as Barb. Therefore, Barb was part
of the class sought to protect.
Dave has violated a statute and breached his standard of care owed to Barb.
CAUSATION
ACTUAL CAUSE
But for Dave driving at twice the speed limited [sic], Barb would not have been injured how
and when she was.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Barb’s injuries were a for[e]seeable result of Dave speeding and colliding with Barb.
Adam’s act of sliding into Barb’s lane is not an intervening act to break the chain of
causation.
Therefore, Dave is the actual and proximate cause of Barb’s injuries.
DAMAGES
GENERAL DAMAGES
Barb is entitled to general damages for pain & suffering caused by this accident.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
Barb is entitled to special damages for her medical bills for her injuries including a broken
sternum. Sue is also entitled to special damages for lost wages.
-12-
PROPERTY DAMAGES
Defined & discussed supra.
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Defined & discussed supra.
LAST CLEAR CHANCE DOCTRINE
If the court finds that Dave had the last clear chance to avoid his collision with Barb, Barb
will not be barred from recovery if she is found to have contributed to her injuries.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
Barb & Dave’s degree of fault will be determined by percentages and damages paid
accordingly.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Here, Barb did not knowingly[,] willingly or unreasonably assume any risk by sharing a road
with Dave.
Assumption of the risk does not apply.
JOINT & SEVERAL LIABILITY
Defined/discussed supra.
CONTRIBUTION
Dave may seek contribution from Adam[,] reimbursement for any damages Dave pays
above what he is liable [for].
-13-
Question 2
CapCo sells baseball caps to youth leagues and recently approached two new teams, the
Bears and the Lions. Uncertain how many caps the team would require, the Bears’ team
manager signed a written contract that included the following:
“The Bears will purchase all baseball caps needed for the 2006 season
(approximately 75-100 caps) from CapCo @ $7.50 per cap. All modifications to this
contract must be in writing to be enforceable.”
When the Bears team manager subsequently placed the baseball cap order with CapCo,
he informed CapCo that fewer kids had signed up than had been expected, and,
consequently, the Bears needed only 50 caps. CapCo responded that such small orders
generated less profit and would accordingly trigger a higher price of $8.50 per cap. The
Bears team manager orally agreed to that higher price.
CapCo also contacted the Lions, whose team manager was considering several baseball
cap suppliers. CapCo sent the Lions manager a letter that stated: “I can offer you a special
deal for a limited time. CapCo will provide 100 caps @ $2.50 per cap, delivery within one
week.”
Upon seeing CapCo’s letter, the Lions manager was excited about the proposed contract
price and immediately mailed her acceptance to CapCo. Before receiving the Lions
manager’s response, CapCo realized that its offer contained a clerical error–the price was
supposed to be $6.50, not $2.50, per cap. CapCo immediately telephoned the Lions
manager and informed her of the clerical error.
The Bears refuse to pay $8.50 instead of $7.50 for each of the 50 caps. CapCo contends
that the Bears must order at least 75 caps to obtain the $7.50 per cap price. The Lions
want to enforce the $2.50 per cap price.
1. If CapCo files a lawsuit against the Bears seeking damages for breach of contract, who
is likely to prevail? Discuss.
2. If the Lions file a lawsuit seeking to enforce the contract price of $2.50 per baseball cap,
who is likely to prevail? Discuss.
-14-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
2)
CapCo v. Bears
Governing law
As this contract involves the sale of baseball caps, which are items identified as movable
at contract formation, the UCC will govern.
A valid contract requires mutual assent (offer and acceptance), consideration, and the
absence of defenses.
Offer
An offer is a manifestation of present intent to contract, communicated to an offeree with
sufficient certainty that the other party would reasonably believe that his or her assent
would form a bargain. Here, we have a written contract between the Bears and CapCo for
a requirements/output contract. The only formation issue is whether there was sufficient
certainty in this contract that a court could provide a remedy. Under the UCC, the essential
terms are parties and quantity. Under this contract, only a statement estimate is provided
(75-100 caps). However, the facts indicate that this is an output/requirements contract by
use of the phrase “purchase all baseball caps needed for the 2006 season.” Under the
UCC, as long as the parties act in good faith, and do not increase in disproportionate
amounts, nor decrease in bad faith, a quantity term will be implied by the course of
performance.
Acceptance
Acceptance is a manifestation of assent to the terms of the offer, made in a manner
required by the offer. Here, since we have a written contract, a valid acceptance is made.
Consideration
Consideration is a bargained[-]for exchange in which each party suffers some legal
detriment. Here, we have a contract for the purchase and sale of goods, so the exchange
and legal detriment elements appear to be met.
Illusory promise? - An illusory promise only has the appearance of binding a party.
However, under the UCC, the duty of good faith will satisfy the consideration element. In
addition, under the UCC the parties have an implied promise of good faith and fair dealing.
Promissory estoppel? Where consideration is lacking, to the extent necessary to prevent
an injustice, the court may hold that plaintiff’s reliance on a promise will substitute for
-15-
consideration. However, this is not required in this case.
Defenses?
Statute of Frauds (“SOF”)
Under contract law, certain contracts must be in writing in order to be enforced. Under the
UCC, a sale of goods contract valued at $500 or more must be in writing, and signed by
the party against whom enforcement is sought. In this case, CapCo is seeking
enforcement against the Bears. The facts indicate that the Bears’ team manager signed
a written contract. The SOF has been satisfied.
Parol Evidence Rule
The parol evidence rule prohibits introduction of evidence of a prior or contemporaneous
agreement that varies or contradicts a fully integrated writing. A merger clause is usually
a strong indication that the writing is fully integrated. To determine if a writing is fully
integrated, the court may follow either the Corbin or Williston view. Here, we have a written
contract with sufficient certainty for a court to enforce it. The attempted change to the
contract to 50 caps occurred after contract formation and will be admissible and treated as
a modification.
Mistake
When a party to a contract makes a mistake, it is a unilateral mistake, which will not
prevent enforcement of the contract unless the other party knew or had reason to know of
the mistake. Mistake occurs at contract formation, which may apply here, as an estimate
was provided for 75-100 caps. Since we are dealing with an output/requirements contract,
this “mistaken estimate” will be treated differently, as the quantity in an output/requirements
contract is not explicitly stated in the contract at formation. Mistakes after formation may
be addressed as a discharge of duty issue.
Modification
Under the UCC, a modification requires mutual assent; no new consideration is required,
but the parties must act in good faith. Here, the elements appear to be established as the
parties orally agreed. There are 3 issues with respect to the attempted change to the
contract. First, there is a no-oral modification (“NOM”) clause in the written contract.
Secondly, because it is an output/requirements contract, a change to output/requirements
may be made as long as the decrease in requirements is made in good faith, or the
increase is not disproportionate to a statement estimate. Thirdly, a modification is still
subject to the Statute of Frauds and must be in writing if it is a sales of goods contract of
$500 under the UCC, which is what we have here.
-16-
NOM clause. Generally, under such a clause, it is construed as a private statute of frauds,
and the modification must be in writing, as it was a term/promise of the agreement.
However, some courts may construe the oral agreement as a waiver of the NOM clause
itself. The enforcement of the modification will depend on the jurisdiction, but it will likely
be held enforceable provided the parties acted in good faith.
Output/Requirements contract. As stated above, a decrease in requirements is acceptable
if made in good faith. Here, the Bears team manager had fewer kids sign up than he
expected. There are no facts to indicate that he acted in bad faith. The court will likely
enforce the reduction.
State of Frauds. Defined supra. If the modification is $500 or more, the SOF applies.
Here, the modification was for 50 caps at $8.50 or $425. The contract will not fall under the
SOF.
Was the modification made under duress or bad faith?
Modification is defined supra. Here, CapCo had a duty to act in good faith. When the
Bears reduced their amount, CapCo increased the price due to less profits. While not
necessarily in bad faith, CapCo assumed this risk when he entered into an
output/requirements contact. However, because of the stated estimate of 75-100, CapCo
may be successful in arguing he did not believe that nearly a 50 percent reduction in caps
was a reasonable risk to assume. Unless an injustice would occur, the original price will
likely be enforced.
Performance/Breach/Remedies
A party’s duties arise and their performance is due when all conditions are satisfied,
excused or waived. Here, Bears owed a duty to pay CapCo upon receipt of the goods.
However, Bears is now claiming they do not owe the increased price.
Will CapCo or Bears prevail?
A non-breaching party may recover their expectation damages, plus consequential and
incidental damages, less cost avoided and loss avoided. Here, if CapCo shipped 50 hats,
he will be entitled to the contract price for that installment. However, the issue is the price.
Because the oral modification will likely [be] held to be valid as discussed above, and the
loss in profit was assumed by CapCo because of the nature of an output/requirements
contract, CapCo may recover for 50 caps at the price of $7.50 unless an injustice would
result.
Lions v. CapCo
Governing law. The UCC will also govern this case as in CapCo v. Bears. The elements
of a contract are defined supra.
-17-
Offer? Defined supra. Here, we have a written letter fro[m] CapCo to Lions. There are
sufficient terms because parties and quantity is [sic] identified. There is a valid offer.
Merchant[’]s firm offer?
Under the UCC, a merchant’s signed memo (“merchant’s firm offer”) will be construed as
an option and must be held open for the time stated, not to exceed 3 months. Here, we
have a letter from CapCo to Lions identifying the essential terms (quantity and parties).
While not signed, it was presumably a letter from CapCo. If on letterhead, the courts will
find this to satisfy the signature requirement. While a particular time is not stated, it will be
held open for a reasonable time.
Acceptance?
Defined supra. Under the mailbox rule, acceptance is effective upon dispatch. Here, Lions
mailed a letter immediately after reading CapCo’s letter. Absent other circumstances, this
is valid acceptance upon dispatch.
Revoked offer/Counteroffer?
Generally, unless an offer is irrevocable, a party may revoke at any time prior to
acceptance. Here, Lions mailed his acceptance. Prior to receiving the acceptance, CapCo
found its error and phoned Lions. However, the acceptance was effective upon dispatch
as stated above. Unless CapCo can prove a valid mistake, the acceptance formed the
contract and his attempt to revoke is invalid. In addition, because of the merchant’s firm
offer rule, CapCo could not revoke his offer until after a reasonable time, not to exceed 3
months. The facts indicate a short period of time had passed, so the irrevocable period
was still in effect.
Defenses?
Statute of Frauds.
Defined supra. Here, we have a writing from CapCo, with the essential terms. This will
satisfy the SOF.
Mistake
When a party to a contract makes a mistake, it is a unilateral mistake, which will not
prevent enforcement of the contract unless the other party knew or had reason to know of
the mistake. Here, CapCo made a typographical error on their letter and got the price
wrong, making this a unilateral mistake. While the facts indicate that the Lions manager
was “excited” when he read the letter, there is no indication that he knew or should have
known about the error. $2.50 per cap does not sound so unreasonable that he should have
known. The letter also stated that it was a special deal for a limited time. If the court finds
-18-
that Lions did now [sic] know, then Lions will be able to enforce the contract as he received
it.
Performance/Breach/Remedies
Remedies are defined supra. Lions is owed performance by CapCo to sell/ship the caps
at the stated price. Lions will prevail in this case and may sue for enforcement of the
contract, or he may cover and sue for the difference between the market price and the
contract price.
-19-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
2)
CapCo v. Bears
Contract Formation
A contract is a promise or a set of promises that the law will enforce. A valid contract
consists of an offer, acceptance, consideration, and legal purpose and parties. We have
legal parties and purpose in the CapCo - Bear contract.
Does the UCC apply?
This is an order for the sale of goods (things that are movable at the time of identification
for contract) so the UCC applies.
Are the parties merchants?
A merchant is someone who sells goods of the type involved in the transaction or holds
himself out as having knowledge peculiar to the goods in question. CapCo is in the
business of selling baseball caps. CapCo is a merchant.
The Bears is [sic] [in] a youth league and probably an incidental purchaser of goods related
to youth baseball. The Bears organization is not a merchant.
Does the Statute of Frauds (SOF) apply?
The Statute of Frauds requires that certain agreements must be in writing to be
enforceable. These would include promises in consideration of marriage, contracts that
could not be performed in one year, the transfer of land, payments by an executor (out of
his pocket) for the debts of an estate, guarantors, and in this case, by way of the UCC
which codified the requirement, the sale of goods for $500 or more.
Was there an Offer?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the intended
offeree with the understanding of the offeree that his or her assent would conclude the
bargain.
Here, we have the Bears receiving a written offer from CapCo for the sale of “all baseball
caps needed” for the 2006 season. Since it is written, it satisfies the SOF (supra) and is
needed since the estimated contract price could be as much as $7,500 if up to 100 (upper
range of estimate) baseball caps were ordered by Bears.
-20-
Therefore, we have an offer.
UCC Firm Offer?
In addition to the fact that this appears to be a requirements contract, CapCo is bound as
a merchant under the firm offer rule[,] which stipulates that if a merchant in a signed writing
to buy or sell goods gives assurances that the offer will remain open, it will remain open for
the term stated, but not longer than 3 months if there is no consideration.
Was there an Acceptance?
An acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. Here, we have the
Bears team manager ordering hats in reliance on the written offer from CapCo when he
ordered 50 caps.
Was there Consideration?
Consideration is that which is bargained for, i.e., the baseball caps. We have
consideration.
Requirements Contract
A requirements contracts is one whereby a merchant will provide whatever number of
goods that the buyer requires. Here, we have a requirements contract provided by CapCo
to Bears to provide all of their baseball caps “needed” for the 2006 season, which have
been estimated at 75-100 caps, at $7.50 each.
Once the Bears manager ordered 50 caps, he was acting within the guidelines of a
requirements contract. He was not obligated to place a minimum order, but use only “good
faith” in negotiating and performing the contract. CapCo would be obligated to provide
these caps at $7.50 each under the terms outlined.
Illusory Promise
An illusory contract is one in which the promisor makes a promise that is really not binding
because it does not commit him to any action. CapCo may argue that since the Bears only
ordered 50 caps and didn’t have to order any at all, that they were making an illusory
promise. However, this argument will fail in the case of requirements contracts as long as
the parties use “good faith” and fair dealings.
No Oral Modification Clauses
The CapCo - Bear contained a no oral modification clause, i.e., “all modifications to this
contract must be in writing.” Under the UCC, this provision will be enforced.
-21-
However, when the Bears manager informed CapCo that they only needed 50 caps and
CapCo responded that the price would now “trigger” a higher price per cap of $8.50, these
negotiations were done orally so there was no modification to the agreement because it
was not in writing.
Therefore, the original requirements contract was still in force at $7.50 each.
Breach of Contract
A breach of contract occurs when one party to the contract indicates that they will not
perform according to the terms of the contract, i.e., their agreed performance. A breach
can be minor or major (material). Upon breach, the non-breaching party can suspend
(minor) or cancel their own performance (major) and sue for damages.
In CapCo’s suit against the Bears, it is most likely that CapCo will lose because Bears had
an enforceable requirements contract with CapCo for only the caps that they required (“all
caps needed”) for the 2006 season. There was not a minimum order size that was
specified in the written agreement. And, because the contract provided for no oral
modifications, the later agreement by the Bears manager would not be binding.
In summary, The Bears will prevail and if necessary, they will be entitled to damages based
on cover (purchase caps from another supplier) and collect damages from CapCo for the
additional amounts they might have to pay the new supplier for the caps (the cover price -
contract price). Or if they decide not to cover, the market price - contract price at the time
of the breach.
Lions v. CapCo
Contract Formation
A contract is a promise or a set of promises that the law will enforce. A valid contract
consists of an offer, acceptance, consideration, and legal purpose and parties. We have
legal parties and purpose in the Lions - CapCo contract.
Does the UCC apply?
This is an order for the sale of goods (things that are movable at the time of identification
for contract) so the UCC applies.
Are the parties merchants?
A merchant is someone who sells goods of the type involved in the transaction or holds
himself out as having knowledge peculiar to the goods in question. CapCo is in the
business of selling baseball caps. CapCo is a merchant.
-22-
The Lions is [sic][in] a youth league and probably an incidental purchaser of goods related
to youth baseball. The Lions organization is not a merchant.
Does the Statute of Frauds (SOF) apply?
The Statute of Frauds requires that certain agreements must be in writing to be
enforceable. These would include promises in consideration of marriage, contracts that
could not be performed in one year, the transfer of land, payments by an executor (out of
his pocket) for the debts of an estate, guarantors, and in this case, by way of the UCC
which codified the requirement, the sale of goods for $500 or more.
Was there an Offer?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the intended
offeree with the understanding of the offeree that his or her assent would conclude the
bargain.
When CapCo sent the Lions a letter, it contained words that indicated to a reasonable
offeree that it was an offer, i.e., “I can offer...” It also contained definite terms such as
quantity (100 caps), price ($2.50) and time for performance (one week).
Therefore, we have an offer.
UCC Firm Offer?
In addition to the fact that this appears to be a requirements contract, CapCo is bound as
a merchant under the firm offer rule[,] which stipulates that if a merchant in a signed writing
to buy or sell goods gives assurances that the offer will remain open, it will remain open for
the term stated, but not longer than 3 months if there is no consideration.
The letter to the Lions said that the offer would be good “for a limited time” (determined as
a reasonable time probably not to exceed one week - the time for delivery). Therefore, this
is not a firm offer, but is subject to revocation by the offeror.
Was there an Acceptance?
An acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. Here, we have the Lions
team manager ordering hats in reliance on the written offer from CapCo when he
“immediately mailed an acceptance to CapCo.[”]
Under the mailbox rule, an acceptance is effective when posted if posted in compliance
with the offer. Here, because the offer was in a form of a letter, a reasonable acceptance
would be by return letter (“mailed her acceptance”).
Therefore, we have an acceptance.
-23-
Was there Consideration?
Consideration is that which is bargained for, i.e., the 100 baseball caps for $2.50 per cap.
We have consideration.
Revocation Attempt/Unilateral Mistake
Once CapCo learned of the mistake they had [made] when they quoted the caps at $2.50
per cap as opposed to $6.50, CapCo telephoned Lions about the mistake. However,
acceptance had already occurred when Lions mailed the acceptance so this attempt at
revoking the offer at $2.50 will fail.
However, if the Lions knew of [sic] should have known that $2.50 was an obvious error,
then they will not be allowed to “snap up” the hats at the $2.50 price. However, there are
no facts to suggest they were aware of the miscalculation.
Therefore, the revocation will fail because the Lions did not receive the revocation before
accepting the offer under the mailbox rules (acceptance when mailed) and CapCo will not
be allowed a defense of unilateral mistake.
Enforcement of Contract
The Lions accepted a bona fide offer from CapCo for 100 caps at $2.50 each that was in
writing and accepted within a reasonable time. They will be able to enforce the agreement
against CapCo.
-24-
Question 3
Dan separated from his wife, Bess, and moved out of the house they own together. About
one week later, on his way to work the night shift, Dan passed by the house and saw a light
on. He stopped and rang the bell. Bess answered the door. She was polite, but told him
she was getting ready to go out with her girlfriends. As Dan left, he saw a pair of men’s
shoes in the entryway.
Later that night, Dan told his friend, Fred, about the shoes. Fred said: “Let’s go over there
and check it out. We’ll use my car so Bess won’t recognize it.” Dan and Fred drove over
to the house, and parked a block away, so the car would not be seen by Bess. Fred waited
in the car while Dan went around the side of the house, turned over a garbage can and
climbed on top to look through the open bedroom window. Dan saw a man, Chris, on the
bed with Bess. Dan jumped through the open window and started yelling at Bess, “How
could you do this?”
Dan then went to the closet and grabbed his shotgun, which was locked in a plastic case.
He turned to Chris, and chased him down the stairs and out of the house, yelling deadly
threats. Chris tripped, fell, and hit his head on the front steps. The fall knocked him
unconscious.
Bess called the police. When the police arrived, Dan was sitting outside on the front porch
holding the shotgun, still in the locked case. Dan told the police that he had chased Chris
out because he feared his wife had been in danger.
Fred got out of the car and came over to the scene. The police placed Dan in custody and
asked Fred to meet them at the station for further questioning.
1. With what crime or crimes, if any, can Dan reasonably be charged and what defenses,
if any, can he reasonably assert? Discuss.
2. With what crime or crimes, if any, can Fred reasonably be charged and what defenses,
if any, can he reasonably assert? Discuss.
-25-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
3)
State v. Dan
Conspiracy - an agreement between two or more people with the specific intent to commit
an unlawful act or a lawful act by unlawful means.
The facts show that Dan had stopped by to see his wife, Bess, from whom he was
separated[,] and while there he saw a pair of men[’]s shoes. Dan told his friend Fred about
it at work[,] who suggested they go over and check it out. Fred suggested they use his car
so Bess wouldn’t recognize it. They went to the house but parked a block away. Dan
climbed on top of a trash can to look in the bedroom window of the house while Fred waited
in the car. Dan would not be charged with conspiracy.
Burglary
Common Law - the breaking and entering [of] the dwelling of another at nighttime with the
specific intent to commit a felony therein.
Modern Law - the entering [of] a building to commit a[n] unlawful act.
The facts show that Dan worked the night shift and came by later that night after work to
Bess’s house. Dan and Bess were separated and she was the only one living in the house
and therefore it is the dwelling of another[,] not Dan’s. Dan jumped through an open
window when he saw a man in bed with Bess. This jumping through a window shows an
entering into the house. However, Dan did not break into the house so under common law
this would fail. The facts do not show that Dan had any intent to commit a felony when he
jumped through the window. He was yelling at Bess but did not show that their [sic] was
any intent to do a[n] unlawful act at that point. He did commit unlawful acts later but did not
have the specific intent when he jumped through the window.
Therefore under both Common Law and Modern Law there is no burglary. Dan cannot be
charged with burglary.
Assault is a specific intent crime which may be a[n]:
(1) Attempted battery
(2) Intentional placing one in reasonable apprehension or fear of immediate danger for
one’s life.
-26-
Assault of Chris:
The facts show that Dan went to the closet and grabbed his shotgun and began chasing
Chris down the stairs and out of the house. Since Chris was fleeing from Dan he would be
in reasonable apprehension and fear for his life. It was an immediate threat as Dan was
carrying a shotgun.
Dan will argue that it was not a reasonable apprehension as there was no immediate
danger since the shotgun was still in its locked plastic case and therefore Dan was unable
to fire it. However, this argument will fail as Dan could have used the gun as a weapon
against Chris without firing it as he could have hit him with the gun. Therefore there was
an assault.
Dan will argue that he did not have the specific intent to harm Chris and therefore was not
guilty of assault. He was only yelling at her [sic] and did not take any steps towards her to
place her [sic] in danger. The State will argue that the yelling combined with the getting of
the gun was enough to place him in reasonable apprehension or fear as he could have
unlocked the gun at any time and used it on Chris.
Defense of Others - One is privileged to use reasonable force to protect others. Dan will
argue that he thought Bess was in danger and that he was trying to protect her. He will
argue that he used reasonable force as he did not take the gun out of its locked case. This
argument will fail as the facts show that Dan had seen men[’]s shoes in the house when
he had been there earlier and further that he had seen her in bed with Chris. He also had
yelled at Bess and asked her how she could do this. This shows that he knew she was not
in danger but instead he was angry and shocked at what he had seen. There are no facts
to show that Bess was in any danger.
Dan will be charged with the assault of Chris.
Assault of Bess
The facts show that Dan jumped through the window and began yelling at Bess. While
mere words may not be sufficient to cause apprehension[,] when it is coupled with Dan
getting a gun out of the closet[,] that is enough to make Bess apprehensive or fearful of
immediate harm.
Dan will argue that he did not have the specific intent to harm Bess and therefore was not
guilty of assault. He was only yelling at her and did not take any steps towards her to place
her in danger. The State will argue that the yelling combined with the getting of the gun
was enough to place her in reasonable apprehension or fear[,] as he could have unlocked
the gun at any time and used it on Bess.
Dan will be found guilty of assault of Bess.
-27-
Battery of Chris - An unlawful application of force on the person of another. Battery is a
general intent crime.
The State will argue that Dan’s chasing Chris with a gun and threatening Chris that [sic]
caused him to trip, fall and hit his head on the steps since he was trying to escape the
assault. The facts do not show that any physical force was used by Dan against Chris.
However, since Dan’s chasing of Chris was the actual cause of his fall[,] Dan will be
charged with the Battery against Chris.
Defense of Others - One is privileged to use reasonable force to protect others. Dan will
argue that he thought Bess was in danger and that he was trying to protect her. He will
argue that he used reasonable force[,] as he did not take the gun out of its locked case.
This argument will fail as the facts show that Dan had seen men[’]s shoes in the house
when he had been there earlier and further that he had seen her in bed with Chris. He also
had yelled at Bess and asked her how she could do this. This shows that he knew she was
not in danger but instead he was angry and shocked at what he had seen. There are not
facts to show that Bess was in any danger so this defense fails.
Attempted Murder of Chris - An attempt is a substantial step taken towards the commission
of a crime[,] which in this case would be murder.
Dan grabbed his gun and began chasing Chris[,] yelling deadly threats[.] These are
substantial steps towards the commission of murder. Chris was running down the stairs
and out of the house trying to escape Dan. The facts show that Chris was in fear for his
life. If in fact Dan had killed Chris or Chris had died from his injuries the attempted murder
would merge into the crime of murder. However, since Chris was only unconscious there
are not facts to show he died.
Dan will argue that he had no specific intent to kill Chris but was just acting in the heat of
the moment due to seeing his wife in bed with Chris. He will argue that he had no time to
cool off and that he was provoked by seeing his wife in bed with Chris. He will further
argue that he never took the gun out of its locked case and was in fact sitting waiting for
the police on the porch with the gun still in the locked plastic case. This too shows that he
lacked the specific intent.
The State will argue that a gun can be used as a weapon without firing it and that Dan was
using it as a weapon to kill Chris[,] but there are no facts to support this contention.
However, the court will find that Dan lacked the specific intent to kill Chris as he did not use
the weapon against Chris in any manner[,] so Dan will not be charged with attempted
murder.
Defense of Others - One is privileged to use reasonable force to protect others. Dan will
argue that he thought Bess was in danger and that he was trying to protect her. He will
argue that he used reasonable force as he did not take the gun out of its locked case. This
-28-
argument will fail as the facts show that Dan had seen men[’]s shoes in the house when
he had been there earlier and further that he had seen her in bed with Chris. He also had
yelled at Bess and asked her how she could do this. This shows that he knew she was not
in danger but instead he was angry and shocked at what he had seen. There are no facts
to show that Bess was in any danger.
State v. Fred
Conspiracy - defined and discussed supra. Fred cannot be charged with conspiracy.
Accomplice Liability - One who aids, abets or encourages another in the commission of a
crime is liable for the same crimes.
The facts show that Fred suggested they got [sic] to Bess’s house to find out why a man[’]s
shoes were at the house. He also suggested they take his car and park a block away so
that Bess wo[uld]n’t recognize the car or see it. This shows that Fred was encouraging Dan
to go to Bess’s house. Fred also waited in the car while Dan went to the house to check
things out. The State will argue that Fred’s acts shows the [sic] was an accomplice to the
crime as he aided Dan by driving him to the scene of the crimes. He encouraged him by
saying [“]Let’s go check it out”. Further, by waiting in the car while Dan was at the house
he could be considered a getaway driver and was further providing aid to Dan.
As an accomplice[,] Fred can be charged with all of the crimes that Dan is charged with[,]
which in this case is battery of Chris, assault of Chris and assault of Bess.
Fred will argue that he did not have the intent to commit any crimes and thought Dan was
going to check things out. He will further argue that he did not want Dan to commit any
crimes. However, this argument will fail due to the secrecy with which they approached the
house. Fred may also argue that he remained in the car and was unaware of what Dan
was doing and he did not know Dan was committing any crime.
Fred will not be charged with the crimes listed supra if his defense of lack of intent
succeed[s].
-29-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
3)
STATE v. DAN
1. With what crime or crimes can Dan be charged?
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT A CRIME
An agreement by two or more parties to commit a crime with the specific intent that the
crime be committed.
Here, “Dan told his friend Fred” about the suspicious shoes in his wife Bess’s house and
[sic] which point Fred suggested that they “check it out.” There is no clear agreement
between the parties except to go to the house. Whatever they meant by “check it out”
could be deemed an implied conspiracy but there is no evidence from the facts that the two
men planned to commit any crime or do any harm.
Thus, although they were acting in concert, there is no agreement to commit a specific
crime.
SOLICITATION TO COMMIT A CRIME
Requesting, urging, tempting another to commit a crime with the specific intent that the
solicitee commit the crime.
Here, Fred said “Let’s go over there and check it out” and offered to use his car so Bess
wouldn’t recognize them. Again, while this is suspicious and may be childish it does not
rise to the level of a specific crime. Nor did Fred urge Dan to do something illegal.
Thus, while Fred instigated this childish behavior there is no specific desire to commit a
crime as evidenced by the duo[’]s communication.
PRINCIPAL
At common law, a principal is the person who actually carries out or commits the criminal
elements of the crime at the scene of the crime. Modernly a principal is the same as
common law.
Here, Dan went toward the house and Fred stayed in the car. Thus, Fred was not close
to Dan while Dan acted[,] and each element of each crime below was committed by Dan.
Thus, [Dan] acted as a common law principal and modernly as a principal in the
commission of the crimes listed below.
-30-
BURGLARY - COMMON LAW
The trespassory breaking and entering [of] the dwelling house of another in the nighttime
with an intent to commit a felony therein.
Here, Dan entered his own house in the nighttime on his way to work. Although he “owned”
the house with Bess, he no longer had habitation privileges and so any entry would be
deemed trespassory without Bess’s consent. There are no facts to indicate Dan’s intent
upon entering and so entry alone will not prove that he had a felonious intent – perhaps he
originally just wanted to talk to them, even though he was yelling. Further Dan entered an
“open” window and so the breaking element is not satisfied.
Thus, Dan did not commit common law burglary.
BURGLARY - MODERNLY
Breaking into any structure to commit any crime, even a misdemeanor.
Here, Dan entered without Bess’s consent and started “yelling” immediately. If he planned
to commit a battery[,] which may be inferred by his immediate “yelling” and rush to get his
shotgun, he would have committed a modern burglary.
Thus, Dan may be charged with a modern burglary.
ASSAULT - ATTEMPTED BATTERY
A substantial step toward the completion of a battery with the specific intent that a battery
be committed.
Here, Dan “chased” Chris down the stairs and caused Chris to fall. He was chasing him
with a shotgun[,] which he could use as a weapon independent of shooting it[,] and his
chasing, coupled with his “yelling deadly threats”[,] supports a substantial step toward a
battery[,] given that they were in close quarters.
Thus, Dan will be charged with assault type of attempted battery.
ASSAULT - CREATION OF FEAR
Defendant intentionally created a reasonable apprehension of receipt of an imminent
battery in the person of the victim.
Here, as outlined immediately above, Chris was “chased” and obviously in fear as he “fell”[,]
and likely did so out of rushing to vacate the house. Chris was aware of and saw Dan so
he would have been aware of the gun.
-31-
Thus, if Chris had a reasonable fear of being harmed, Dan will be charged with this type
of assault.
ASSAULT - AGGRAVATED ASSAULT
Assault with a deadly weapon and/or felonious intent.
Here, even though the shotgun was “still in the locked case” Dan had the apparent ability
to use the gun in a deadly manner.
Thus, Dan will be charged with aggravated assault.
BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to the person of the victim resulting in harm or offensive
contract without consent or privilege.
Here, although Dan did not actually touch Chris[,] from the facts, Dan put the forces in
motion[,] causing the harmful contact wherein Chris was knocked unconscious from the fall
after being “chased” by Dan. Force may be an application of force to something so closely
related to the victim as to be a part of[sic]. Since Dan was “chasing” Chris and yelling at
him, Chris’s escape was probably not careful and[,] again, Dan put the risky forces into
motion that caused Chris’s fall.
Thus, because Dan put the forces into motion causing Chris to fall, he may be charged with
battery.
MERGE -
An assault of attempted battery will merge into the completed crime of batter[y].
Here, the battery type assault will merge but the creation of fear assault will remain a
separate charge.
ATTEMPTED MURDER
A substantial step toward the completion of a murder with the intent to kill.
MURDER is homicide with malice aforethought.
Here, Dan must have evidenced an intent and desire to kill coupled with his actions. A
crime that requires malice like murder requires a specific intent in the attempt. Because
Dan did not take the gun out of the locked case he did not take a “substantial step” toward
the murder, unless he planned to knock Chris around with the gun in the locked case. But,
since he did no further harm to Chris from the facts[.] [sic] After Chris fell, it is not possible
-32-
to infer that Dan wanted Chris dead.
Thus, a charge for attempted murder will likely fail.
DEFENSES
ADEQUATE PROVOCATION
Defendant was provoked to kill; a reasonable person would have been provoked to kill; the
defendant did not cool down from the time of provocation to the time of the killing; and a
reasonable person would not have cooled down from the time of provocation to the time
of the killing.
Here, at common law catching one’s spouse in the act of suffering from a staggering blow
may have supported a mitigation of a crime due to adequate provocation. Here, however,
Dan saw Chris “on the bed” with Bess[,] not having sex with her[,] from the facts. Further,
no reasonable person would remain provoked from the original provocation of seeing shoes
in the entryway long enough to return and burglarize the house. This issue depends on
whether the court looks at the provocation as commencing with the spotting of the shoe in
the entryway long enough to return and burglarize the house. This issue depends on
whether the court looks at the provocation as commencing with the spotting of the shoe in
the entryway – in which case any reasonable person would have calmed down – or at the
time he looked into the window and still[,] since the couple did not appear to be making
love, Dan’s acts will not be mitigated because of this theory. Further he did not complete
the crime of murder.
Thus, Dan’s offenses will not be mitigated.
IMPERFECT SELF[-]DEFENSE
An honest but unreasonable and mistaken belief in the necessity of deadly force.
Here, Dan claims “he feared his wife had been in danger”[,] which seems unreasonable
because Chris ran away and there are no facts to support this. Dan came to the house in
a childish manner[,] without a legitimate reason given that he “climbed on top” of a garbage
can to spy on his wife Bess. However, even an imperfect self[-]defense may be supported
by an unreasonable mistake.
Thus, unless the court finds any reason for Dan to fear for Bess, this theory will fail to
mitigate Dan’s behavior.
DEFENSE OF OTHERS
At common law a close relationship was required[;] modernly anyone may defend anyone
with whatever reasonable force is necessary to repel the attack[,] and one may defend
-33-
another with whatever amount of force it reasonably appears that the victim would have
been privileged to use.
Here, Dan was “close” to Bess as a separated husband, but Chris was “on the bed with
Bess”[,] nothing more[,] from the facts. There is nothing to say that Bess was privileged to
use any force against Chris[,] which would support Dan’s claim.
Thus, this theory will likely fail.
STATE v. FRED
1. With what crime or crimes can Fred be charged?
CONSPIRACY
Defined supra.
Here, as outline[d] above, the duo did not specify any specific crime; they just went to
“check it out”[,] and we don’t know what that means.
Thus, Fred will not be charged with conspiracy.
SOLICITATION
Defined supra.
Here, Fred may have impliedly solicited Dan to act by encouraging him to do something
that Fred knew would aggravate Dan. However, because there is no crime mentioned, this
may fail.
Thus, Fred may be charged with solicitation[,] but unless the court infers an implied
solicitation[,] this may fail.
PRINCIPAL IN THE SECOND DEGREE
At common law someone at the scene aiding, encouraging, abetting another in the
commission of a crime. All liability for completed crimes committed by the principal in the
first degree attaches to the principal in the second degree.
Here, Fred aided and abetted Dan by driving and purposefully hiding the car to encourage
Dan’s bad behavior.
Thus, any liability for completed crimes by Dan will attach to Fred.
-34-
ACCESSORY BEFORE THE FACT
At common law [a] person who aids and encourages before the commission of a crime.
All liability for completed crimes committed by the principal in the first degree attaches to
the accessory.
Here, as outlined above, Fred impliedly encouraged Dan to go to Bess’s [house] but
nothing more. However, the resulting activity was encouraged by and instigated by Fred.
Thus, Dan’s liability will attach to Fred because of Fred’s encouragement.
ACCOMPLICE
Modernly an accomplice is the equivalent of a common law accessory. One who aids and
encourages and assists another in committing a crime. All liability for completed crimes
committed by the principal in the first degree attaches to the accomplice.
Here, as noted above, Fred helped Dan commit the crimes.
Thus, liability will attach to Fred for Dan’s crimes.
MISPRIS[I]ON[,] A FELONY
Failure to disclose the commission of a felony or to stop a felony.
Here, Fred should have called the police if and when Dan was away too long. If he heard
yelling, etc., he should have done something to stop the potential altercation.
Thus, Fed will be charged with mispris[i]on[,] a felony.
DEFENSES
MISTAKE OF FACT – UNREASONABLE
may be a defense to criminal culpability – even unreasonable mistake of fact if Fred truly
did not know of Dan’s criminal intent.
Here, Fred may have thought the couple would get back together or talk or something. So
even if his mistake is absurd, given his encouragement and childish behavior[,] it could
negate the mens rea of specific intent to aid and abet, and the other crimes[,] and relieve
Fred of liability as an accomplice or otherwise.
AGENCY
Vicarious liability theory where a principal uses an agent to commit a crime. The principal
authorizes the agent to act[,] who acts at the principal’s direction and control.
-35-
Here, a court may infer that Fred used Dan as an innocent agent to harm Bess. By saying
“Let’s check it out” and by offering to drive, Fred may have been putting Dan in a position
purposefully to harm Bess[,] unbeknownst to Dan[,] and[,] if so[,] the liability for Dan’s
completed crimes would attach to Fred under this theory. Dan would have been acting as
Fred’s instrumentality in this situation. However, there is no dialogue between the two
evidencing an intent or agreement (as outlined above) to commit a specific crime.
Thus, Fred may be charged under this theory with sufficient facts.
-36-
Question 4
Grain Co. purchases grain from farmers each fall to resell as seed grain to other farmers
for spring planting. Because of problems presented by parasites which attack and eat seed
grain that is stored for more than a few months, Grain Co., like all seed grain dealers,
always treats the seed grain it purchases with an invisible mercury-based chemical to
poison these parasites. Grain Co. sells the seed grain loose by the truckload to the farmers
who will plant the seed. The Grain Co. trucks display signs that state: “Seed Grain. Not
for Use in Food Products.”
Farmer Jones bought a truckload of seed grain from Grain Co. She was present when the
seed grain was delivered, and supervised the Grain Co. employees who unloaded the seed
grain into her silos. She then used some of the seed grain to sow her field. When she
found that she had some seed grain left over, she fed it to her dairy cattle.
Farmer Jones sold the milk produced by her dairy cattle to Big Food Stores, Inc. (“Big
Food”). Several of the people who bought their milk at Big Food became seriously ill, and
the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), a government agency that investigates outbreaks
of illness, determined that mercury poisoning was the cause of their illness. CDC traced
the mercury to the milk that Farmer Jones sold to Big Food.
On what theory or theories might the injured milk consumers recover damages from, and
what defenses should they anticipate, in actions against:
1. Grain Co.? Discuss.
2. Farmer Jones? Discuss.
3. Big Food? Discuss.
-37-
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
4)
1. MILK CONSUMERS (MC) v. GRAINCO
PRODUCTS LIABILITY
NEGLIGENCE
Duty
A commercial supplier has a duty to act as a reasonable person like them would.
Breach
Since GrainCo used an invisible mercury[–]based chemical to poison parasites, it would
prevent people such as farmers to [sic] visually recognize that the grain is poisonous. If
GrainCo would use some type of dye or other method to easily identify grain that has been
treated with mercury poison, it would help prevent the misuse of poisonous grain in food
products. Further, GrainCo used an invisible mercury[-]based chemical to poison
parasites[;] it would prevent people such as farmers to [sic] visually recognize that the grain
is poisonous. Even though the GrainCo trucks display signs that state: “Seed Grain. Not
for Use in Food Products”, it is unclear from the facts how big these signs are or if Farmer
Jones saw the signs while she supervised the delivery. However, given the passage of
time, Farmer Jones could have forgotten not to use the Seed Grain in food products.
Finally, even though GrainCo warned to not use the Seed Grain in food products, it did not
warn that invisible mercury poison was used to treat the seed grain.
Therefore, GrainCo breached its duty.
Actual cause
“But for” GrainCo treating its grain seed with invisible mercury[-]based chemicals, CM [sic]
would not have become sick after drinking milk that came from Farmer Jones[’] cows, who
ate the grain seed.
Therefore, GrainCo is the actual cause of MC’s damages.
Proximate cause
MC’s damages are a direct result of GrainCo using poison to treat their grain. It is
foreseeable that farmers may use the grain for food products which may result in injuries,
as those suffered by MC.
-38-
Therefore, GrainCo is the proximate cause.
DAMAGES
MC can recover general damages from their pain and suffering caused by their serious
illness. Further[,] they may recover special damages for out[-]of[-]pocket expenses[,] such
as medical bill[s][,] to treat their serious illness.
DEFENSES
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
A plaintiff’s recovery is reduced by the amount of harm attributable to her own negligence.
In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, any negligence on the party [sic] of the plaintiff is
a complete bar to recovery.
There are no fact[s] to indicate the MC were negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Acts as a complete bar to recovery if it is found that plaintiff was aware of the risk they were
taking and acted unreasonably to place themselves at risk.
The facts do not indicate that MC were aware of any risk they were taking.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory.
STRICT LIABILITY
DUTY
A commercial supplier has an absolute duty to not introduce into the stream of commerce
a defective product.
Foreseeable plaintiff
Under McPhersen v. Buick, a plaintiff does not have to be in privity to recover for damages.
-39-
Breach
Design Defect
Since, GrainCo used an invisible mercury[-]based chemical to poison parasites, it would
prevent people such as farmers to[sic] visually recognize that the grain is poisonous. If
GrainCo would use some type of dye or other method to easily identify grain that has been
treated with mercury poison, it would help prevent the misuse of poisonous grain in food
products.
Therefore, there is a design error.
Warning Defect
Since, GrainCo used an invisible mercury[-]based chemical to poison parasites, it would
prevent people such as farmers to [sic] visually recognize that the grain is poisonous. Even
though the GrainCo trucks display signs that state: “Seed Grain. Not for Use in Food
Products”, it is unclear from the facts how big these signs are or if Farmer Jones saw the
signs while she supervised the delivery. However, given the passage of time, Farmer
Jones could have forgotten not to use the Seed Grain in food products. Finally, even
though GrainCo warned to not use the Seed Grain in food products, it did not warn that
invisible mercury poison was used to treat the seed grain.
Therefore there is a warning defect.
Manufacturing Defect
There are no facts to indicate that the seed grain was not manufactured as intended. The
facts indicate that all seed grain dealers treat their seed in this fashion.
Therefore there is no manufacturing defect.
Actual cause
“But for” GrainCo treating its grain seed with invisible mercury[-]based chemicals, CM
would not have become sick after drinking milk that came from Farmer Jones[’] cows, who
ate the grain seed.
Therefore, GrainCo is the actual cause of MC’s damages.
Proximate cause
MC’s damages are a direct result of GrainCo using poison to treat their grain. It is
foreseeable that farmers may use the grain for food products[,] which may result in injuries,
as those suffered by MC.
-40-
2. MILK CONSUMERS (MC) v. FARMER JONES
PRODUCTS LIABILITY
NEGLIGENCE
Duty
Defined Supra[.]
Breach
Since Farmer Jones fed the Grain Seed to her dairy cows and sold the milk they produced,
causing several people who bought her milk to become seriously ill because of the mercury
poison, she breached the duty she owed consumers.
Therefore, there was a breach.
Actual cause
“But for” Farmer Jones feeding her cows the poisonous grain seed, MC would not have
become seriously ill.
Proximate cause
MC injuries are a direct cause of Farmer Jones feeding her cows the poisonous grain seed.
It is foreseeable that MC could become ill by drinking this milk.
Damages
Defined and discussed supra.
DEFENSES TO NEGLIGENCE
Discussed and defined supra.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory.
STRICT LIABILITY IN TORT
Duty
Defined Supra[.]
-41-
Foreseeable plaintiff
Defined in Supra[.]
Breach
Manufacturing Defect
Since Farmer Jones fed her cows the poisonous grain seed, which caused them to produce
milk that made several people seriously ill, her milk was not as intended to be produced.
Therefore, there is a manufacturing defect.
Warning Defect
Since Farmer Jones failed to warn Big Food or MC that her milk her cows were feds[sic]
the poisonous grain seed containing poison[sic], a warning defect exists.
Therefore there is a warning defect.
Actual cause
Defined and discussed supra[.]
Proximate cause
Defined and discussed supra[.]
Damages
Defined and discussed supra[.]
DEFENSES
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Defined and discussed supra.
WARRANTY
Defined Supra[.]
Since Farmer Jones introduced a defective product into the stream of commerce, the bad
milk, and MC purchased and consumed it, the milk was not safe for normal consumption
of [sic] was not of average quality.
-42-
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory.
3. MILK CONSUMERS v. BIG FOOD
PRODUCTS LIABILITY
NEGLIGENCE
Since Big Foods is unable to identify by reasonable inspection that the milk was poisonous,
it will not be liable under this theory of law.
STRICT LIABILITY
Defined and discussed above.
Since Big Foods has an absolute duty to not introduce a defective product into the stream
of commerce, it is strictly liable for the injuries suffered by MC. Further[,] it may seek
indemnification from the [sic] Farmer Jones and GrainCo.
DEFENSES FOR STRICT LIABILITY
Defined and discussed supra.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory.
WARRANTY
Defined[.]
Since Big Food sold the defective milk to MC, it breached its duty that the milk was safe for
normal use and of average quality.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory.
-43-
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
4)
Injured milk consumers (plaintiffs) v. Grain Co.
I. Can plaintiffs sue Grain Co. for damages based on theories of strict liability in tort,
negligence, and implied warranty for damages from consuming bad milk?
A. To sue for strict liability in tort, the plaintiff must show that there is a proper
defendant, a defect in the product that was the actual and proximate cause of the
cognizable injury to plaintiff. There must be no viable defenses.
1. Is Grain Co. a proper defendant? A proper defendant is someone involved in the
market chain of the milk. This would start with the mild [sic] producers[,] which include the
manufacturer, marketers, wholesalers, distributors, and retailers. Here, Grain Co. was a
manufacturer of grain, not milk. These grains were meant to be sown and not fed to dairy
cattle. However, there may be a foreseeable misuse of the grain as feed for the cattle, and
in fact that is what Farmer Jones did. This led to the bad mild [sic] that caused plaintiffs to
suffer injuries. Therefore, Grain Co. is a proper defendant.
2. Are there proper plaintiffs? A proper plaintiff is the consumer and user of the product.
Foreseeable bystanders who are injured by the product may also make a claim. Here,
plaintiffs are consumers of the bad milk and so will have a claim.
3. Was there a defect in the grain? A defect can by [sic] in the design, manufacturing[,]
or failure to warn.
a. Plaintiffs may argue that there is a defect in the design by applying the parasite poison
to grain that may be used as feed. To do this, plaintiff must show that the risk of injuries
to plaintiffs outweighs the benefit of using the poison. It is a question of fact whether there
is a high probability that farmers will use the grain as feed for their dairy cattle. Farmers
tend to avoid waste of anything on their farm, so there is a high probability that the grain
will be used as feed. The benefit of using this poison instead of something that will be safer
for people down the line must be proven. Since other grain companies also use this poison
and it is state[-]of[-]the[-]art, plaintiff will not be able to win the claim of a design defect.
b. Plaintiffs may argue that there is a defect in the warning on the side of the truck. To do
this, plaintiff must argue that the warning was inadequate. There must be something more
noticeable[,] such as a form for the farmers to sign[,] showing that they know not to use the
grain as feed for their dairy cattle. This would be better than simply a sign on the truck
saying not to use for feed but did not explain the possible repercussion[s]. The fact finders
will find that there is a failure to warn.
-44-
4. Was the defect the actual and proximate cause of the injures to plaintiffs? The facts
show that the CDC investigation proved that the use of the poison was the cause of the
injures.
5. Did plaintiff suffers [sic] damages? Here, the facts show that plaintiffs became seriously
ill[,] so there are probably damages in medical bills and emotional distress. Also, there may
be pecuniary loss from inability to go to work.
6. Can Grain Co. raise the defense of assumption of the risk? The Assumption of the Risk
defense is proven by showing that plaintiffs 1) was [sic] actually aware of the risk and 2)
voluntarily chose to encounter it. Here, plaintiffs had no knowledge that there was poison
in the milk. The defense will fail.
In summary, Grain Co. is strictly liable for the injuries to plaintiffs.
B. To sue for negligence, the plaintiff must show that 1) the defendant owes a duty to act
under a certain standard of care, 2) that defendant breached that duty, 3) the breach was
the actual and proximate cause of the 4) cognizable injures to plaintiff.
1. What duty[,] if any[,] does Grain Co. owe to plaintiffs? There is a general duty for
defendant to act like a reasonable and prudent man under similar circumstances. Here,
Grain Co. must act like a reasonable and prudent grain producer.
2. Did Grain Co. breach its duty? To ascertain, plaintiff may apply the Hand formula,
B < PL. B is the burden of having to act reasonably. P is the probability of an injury
occurring. L is the severity of the injuries that occurred. If the burden to act reasonably is
less than the product of the probability of injury and the severity of the injury, there has
been a breach. Sometimes, courts will add the utility element on the left side of the
equation making it UB < PL. Here, the burden of using a different[,] safer poison or not
using one at all[,] may be great as far as cost. However, the burden of getting a better
warning system may be quite reasonable as compared to the high probability that farmer[s]
may use the grain as feed for their dairy cattle and causing severe injuries to those who
consume the milk. Therefore, Grain Co. has breached by not using a better warning.
3. Causation is as above.
4. Damages is as above.
5. Can Grain Co. raise the defense of contributory negligence or comparative fault? The
defense of contributory negligence will bar the plaintiff from recovery if the plaintiff’s
conduct was also breached[;] that of a reasonable prudent man and the breaching conduct
was the proximate cause of the injury. Here, the plaintiff did not act unreasonably in any
way. All they did were buying[sic] milk at the grocery store. Contributory negligence will
not apply. Comparative fault will reduce the plaintiff’s recovery in proportion to the degree
of negligence of plaintiff’s conduct. Again, it also does not apply.
-45-
C. To sue for implied warranty, there must be a proper defendant who is a merchant and
a proper plaintiff who is the consumer or someone in her household or a foreseeable guest
who may consume the product.
1. The defendant in this action must be a merchant. A merchant is someone who deals
in the goods of the kind or holds himself out as having special knowledge or skills dealing
with the goods in question. Here, the product from Grain Co. is grain and not milk. Grain
Co. is not the proper defendant.
2. Since the plaintiffs did not consume grain and is not in the household of Farmer Jones,
the plaintiffs may not sue based on implied warranty.
The injured milk consumers will win their claims against Grain Co. for strict liability in tort
and negligence, but not under implied warranty.
Injured milk consumers (plaintiffs) v. Farmer Jones
I. Can plaintiffs sue Farmer Jones for damages based on theories of strict liability in tort,
negligence, and implied warranty for damages from consuming bad milk?
A. Strict liability in tort
1. Farmer Jones is the proper defendant in this action because Farmer Jones
manufacture[d] the milk which is defective.
2. Milk consumers are the proper plaintiffs since they purchased the milk.
3. The defect in the milk existed at the time they left Farmer Jones’ farm. It is a defect in
manufacturing the milk, as Farmer Jones chose to use grain with the poison substance to
feed the dairy cattle. The defect in the milk is beyond the consumer expectations. When
people buy milk, they assume that they are reasonably safe for consumption and that they
will not get sick after drinking it. Here, the milk was defective when they left the farmer’s
cattle.
4. Causation is as above.
5. Damages is as above.
6. The only available defense against strict products liability is assumption of the risk[,] and
it does not apply as discussed above.
In conclusion, Farmer Jones is liable to the injured milk consumers for their damages under
the theory of strict liability in tort because of an unreasonably dangerous and defective milk
product.
-46-
B. Negligence
1. Farmer Jones has a duty to act like a reasonable and prudent dairy farmer.
2. Did Farmer Jones breach his [sic] duty by feeding the grain that was meant for sowing
only to his [sic] dairy cattle? Here, the Hand formula may be applied again. The burden
of having to check the grain or make certain that it was not meant for dairy cattle is less
than the high probability of producing poisonous milk that will cause severe illness in people
who consume the milk. All he [sic] had to do is [sic] to be more aware of what he [sic]
does. A reasonable farmer should know about the grains that he use[s]. He [sic] has
breached.
3. Causation is as above.
4. Damages as above.
5. The defenses of contributory negligence and comparative fault will not apply as above.
Assumption of the risk also does not apply.
C. Implied Warranty
1. Farmer Jones is a merchant of milk because he [sic] deals in selling milk to the
groceries [sic]; therefore, he [sic] is an appropriate defendant.
2. The injured milk consumers are the natural and foreseeable buyers and consumers of
the milk from the grocers. As this was foreseeable, we have proper plaintiffs as well.
3. The milk is not merchantable since it is not fit for the purpose for which it was made
when used in a reasonable manner. Here, the milk was not fit for consumption because
it made the consumers seriously ill. The milk was not merchantable.
4. Causation is as above.
5. Damages are as above.
6. Merchants can provide disclaimers or limitations on implied warranties if it was
communicated to the consumers clearly and in words such as “milk as [sic] sold as is”.
However, the facts show no such disclaimers or limitations.
In conclusion, the injured milk consumers will win their claims against Farmer Jones for
strict liability in tort, negligence, and implied warranty.
Injured milk consumers (plaintiffs) v. Big Food
-47-
I. Can plaintiffs sue Big Food for damages based on theories of strict liability in tort,
negligence, and implied warranty for damages from consuming bad milk?
A. Strict liability in tort
1. Big Food is a proper defendant because it is a retailer who sells the milk. Big Food is
in the market chain of getting of milk to the public.
2. The injured milk consumers are proper plaintiffs as discussed above.
3. Defect is as discussed above.
4. Causation is as above.
5. Damages are as above.
Similar to Farmer Jones, Big Food is liable to plaintiffs under the theory of strict liability in
tort.
B. Negligence
1. Big Food has a duty to act like a reasonable and prudent store.
2. Did Big Food breach its duty by not inspecting the milk for the defect? Here, the
dangerous [sic] of the poison in the milk was not easily discoverable by inspection. The
poison is invisible and would not have caused any obvious discoloration of the milk. It
would also be unreasonable for the grocer to taste every product on its shelves to ensure
safety. The burden of having to throughly inspection [sic] the goods before sale would
outweighs [sic] the risk of injury to consumers. Therefore, Big Food did not breach its duty.
3. Causation is as above.
4. Damages are as above.
Big Food did not breach its duty as it would be unreasonable to set up an inspection of all
its goods prior to sale.
C. Implied warranty
1. Big Food is a merchant who deals in the sale of produce such as milk so it is a proper
defendant.
2. The injured milk consumers were customers of Big Food or people in their household
who would reasonably consume the milk. Therefore, we have appropriate plaintiffs.
-48-
3. The milk is not merchantable since it is not fit for the purpose for which it was made
when used in a reasonable manner. Here, the milk was not fit for consumption because
it made the consumers seriously ill. The milk was not merchantable.
4. Causation is as above.
5. Damages are as above.
6. Merchants can provide disclaimers or limitations on implied warranties if it was
communicated to the consumers clearly and in words such as “milk as [sic] sold as is”.
However, the facts show no such disclaimers or limitations.
The injured milk consumers will win their claim against Big Food under the theory of strict
liability in tort and implied warranty but not under negligence.





















