
1. Criminal Law 
2. Contracts 
3. Criminal Law
4. Torts 


1. Criminal Law 

QUESTION 1
Debbie and Jon met in college and dated each other for two years. Debbie loved Jon very much and wanted to marry him. Jon always told her that he loved only her, but he told her he thought they were too young and should not rush into marriage.<br /><br /> One day as Debbie was putting gasoline into her car at the gasoline station, she looked into the car parked next to hers. She was enraged to see her best friend Vickie passionately kissing Jon. Debbie walked over to the car, with the fuel dispenser in her hand, and started yelling at Vickie and Jon. Vickie said, “I’m sorry you had to find out this way. Jon and I love each other and are going to get married.”<br /><br /> Debbie was enraged and shouted, “You’re not going to marry anyone, you slime!” She then pointed the gasoline dispenser at Vickie and sprayed her with gasoline, soaking her hair and clothes. Jon reached over to try to help Vickie. Unfortunately, he was smoking a cigarette. The cigarette ignited the gasoline and Vickie burned to death.<br /><br /> What offense or offenses has Debbie committed and what defenses, if any, would she assert? Discuss. 

A. State v. Debbie
1. Criminal Assault
2. Criminal Battery
3. Murder
	Homicide, Actual Cause, Proximate Cause, Murder, 
4. Mitigating Factors (To reduce the charges, from murder to voluntary manslaughter)
5. Voluntary Manslaughter
6. Involuntary Manslaughter
7. Defense of Insanity



STATE v. DEBBIE
1) Assault
An assault is an act which causes an immediate apprehension of a harmful
or offensive contact.
In this case, the state may argue that when Debbie pointed the gasoline
dispenser at Vickie, while shouting at her, Vickie could have reasonably
apprehended an unlawful and offensive contact, i.e., being sprayed with
gasoline.
Debbie has committed an assault.
2) Battery
Battery is an act which causes a person to suffer a harmful or offensive
contact.
The state may argue that spraying Vickie with gasoline, soaking her hair and
clothes, constituted a harmful and offensive contact.
Debbie has committed a battery, but it will merge with the crimes discussed
below.
3
3) Homicide
Homicide is the death of a human being, which is caused by another human
being.
In this case, Vickie was burned to death, so there is a death of a human
being.
4) Actual Cause
But for Debbie's act of spraying Vickie with gasoline, she would not have
been burned to death, so Debbie is the actual cause.
5) Proximate Cause
The state will argue that a personal being burned to death is the foreseeable
result of spraying them with gasoline.
Debbie will argue that it was Jon's cigarette that ignited her clothes, which
constitutes an independent intervening act which broke the issue of
causation.
Debbie's argument will fail, especially if she could in some way tell that Jon
was smoking a cigarette, i.e., saw smoke or smelled smoke.
Debbie is the proximate cause of Vickie's death, and is therefore responsible
for her homicide.
4
6) Murder
Murder is an unsuccessful homicide, with malice aforethought.
Malice is established by showing:
1) An intent to kill, or
2) An intent to cause great bodily injury, or
3) The death resulted from an awareness of and conscious disregard for a
high risk to human life, or
4) The death resulted during the commission of an inherently dangerous
felony.
There is a homicide as discussed above. In this case, the state may argue
that when Debbie yelled, “You're not marrying anyone, you slime,” and then
sprayed Vickie with gasoline, she demonstrated an intent to kill, or an intent
to cause great bodily harm.
The state may also argue that by spraying gasoline onto a person, Debbie
demonstrated an awareness of and disregard for a high risk to human life
(Depraved Heart).
The state will be able to establish malice.
5
7) First Degree Murder/Second Degree Murder
Murder that is willful, deliberate and premeditated is First Degree Murder,
Second Degree is other types of murder.
If the state can convince a jury that in the brief seconds between seeing Jon
and Vickie and spraying her with gas, Debbie decided to kill her, They will
establish First Degree Murder.
The state will have a difficult time showing that Debbie reflected upon her
act, so she has probably committed second degree murder under a
depraved heart theory.
8) Voluntary Manslaughter
Voluntary manslaughter is an intentional killing of a human being, where
malice is mitigated by adequate provocation.
To be adequate, the provocation must be sufficient to enrage the passion of
a reasonable person, and the defendant must actually be provoked.
Additionally, there must not have been enough time for a reasonable person
to “cool” down, and the defendant must not have actually “cooled” down.
If the state cannot prove murder, it may argue that Debbie intended to kill
Vickie, but that she was provoked by seeing Jon and Vickie passionately
kissing in the car next to her. Seeing a boyfriend kiss your best friend is
sufficient to enrage the passion of a reasonable person, so Debbie's
provocation is reasonable.
6
Additionally there was a break in time between Debbie witnessing the
incident and her actions so she did not cool down, nor is there sufficient time
for a reasonable person to cool down.
Debbie has committed voluntary manslaughter, if the state can show an
intent to kill.
9) Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is an unintended homicide that results from
criminal negligence, or the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to
an inherently dangerous felony.
Debbie may argue that at most she has committed an involuntary
manslaughter, because she did not intend to kill Vickie, and that Vickie's
death resulted from Debbie's criminal negligence or the commission of a
battery.
If Debbie did not intend to kill, she may have committed an involuntary
manslaughter.
10) Attempted murder—Jon
An attempt is a substantial step beyond preparation toward the commission
of a crime, with the specific intent that the crime be committed.
The state may argue that when Debbie sprayed gas on Vickie, while Jon was
seated next to her, smoking a cigarette, she took a substantial step toward
killing Jon also.
7
However, there are no facts to suggest that Debbie intended to kill Jon, so
the state will not be able to prove an attempted murder of Jon.
8
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
State vs. Debbie
State could charge Debbie for criminal assault, battery, and murder (with
possibility of first degree murder) as well as involuntary manslaughter.
Murder
Issue — Can Debbie be charged with murder of Vickie?
Under criminal law, murder is unlawful homicide, killing of a human being by
another, with malice aforethought.
Malice can be found if there is (1) intent to kill, (2) intent to cause great bodily
injury, (3) commission of a dangerous felony, felony murder rule, and (4) act with
awareness of and disregard for the unjustified risk to human life. The depraved
heart murder rule.
Here, this is a killing because Vickie, a human being, died due to the act of
another human being, Debbie. The killing is unlawful because it is not justified.
Here malice can also be found because Debbie pointed the gasoline
dispenser at Vickie and “sprayed” gas on her. This act can be construed as “intent
to kill” because gasoline is a dangerous substance and everyone knows it would
cause death if ignited. Also, there is an intent to cause great injury because even
if not ignited, the chemical feature would cause injury to the people.
Therefore Debbie can be charged with murder of Vickie.
9
Further, if Debbie's act can be construed as deliberated and premeditated,
she could also be charged with “First degree murder.”
Causation
Under criminal, the death of the victim must be actually and proximately
caused by defendant's act.
Actual causation is determined by “but for “ test. Here, but for Debbie's act,
Vickie would not have died. Therefore she actually caused Vickie's death.
Proximate causation is determined when the result is foreseeable and there
is no superseding intervening event to break the chain of causation. Here, Debbie
could argue that Jon's smoking of a cigarette is a superseding event and therefore
had broken the chain of causation. However, State would argue that Jon's smoking
is foreseeable even if it was unreasonable and spraying gasoline on a person could
cause death is also foreseeable.
Therefore, Debbie both actually and proximately caused death of Vickie.
Therefore Debbie can be charged with murder.
Battery
Can Debbie be charged with criminal battery?
Under criminal law, battery is intentional causing harmful or offensive
touching.
Here there is an intentional act because Debbie “sprayed” gasoline on Vickie.
There is also a touching, because gas was put on Vickie by Debbie. There is also
10
a harmful and offensive touching because gasoline is dangerous and [to] be
sprayed in public is offensive.
Therefore, Debbie can be charged with Battery.
Assault
Issue — Can Debbie be charged with criminal assault?
Under criminal law, assault can be either attempted battery or attempt to
cause apprehension of a battery.
Here, there is an attempt to cause apprehension because Debbie “shouted”
with “gasoline dispenser in her hand.” This would cause a reasonable person to
apprehend an offensive or harmful touching.
Therefore, Debbie can be charged with criminal assault.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Issue — Debbie can be charged with involuntary manslaughter?
Under criminal law, involuntary manslaughter is an unintentional killing
without malice aforethought done with criminal negligence. Gross reckless or killing
during a malum in se felony is not enough to charge for felony murder.
Here, Debbie could also be charged for involuntary manslaughter because
her conduct is grossly reckless, i.e., spraying gasoline on another person and
caused death.
Therefore, Debbie can be charged with involuntary manslaughter.
11
Defenses
Mitigation
Issue — Can Debbie mitigate her killing to voluntary
Manslaughter by claiming provocation?
Under criminal law, voluntary manslaughter is an intentional killing without
malice aforethought done with adequate provocation: (1) Provoked if it is a
reasonable person. (2) Defendant provoked. (3) Not time for cooling down. (4)
Defendant did not cool down.
Here, Debbie would argue that she was provoked because she saw Vickie
“passionately kissing” Jon, Debbie's boyfriend, and she was “enraged” to see this.
There is also no time to cool down because it happened when Debbie was
adding gas, a very short period of time.
Therefore, Debbie would be successful to claim “heated passion” killing and
mitigate her crime down from murder to voluntary manslaughter.
Insanity
Under criminal law, insanity is a defense if it negates a required mental state
element of the crime charged. Under M’Naghten test, if due to mental disease the
defendant did not know what she was doing was wrong, she could be found insane.
Under irresistible impulse test, if defendant knew what she was doing was wrong but
could not stop herself she can be found insane.
Here, Debbie could claim that she was in “shock” and became “temporarily
insane” and “could not control herself when she did what she had done.” However,
there is unlikely [sic] she would be successful to raise this defense because there
is [sic] no facts to support this claim.
Therefore, Debbie could not successfully use the defense of insanity.

2. Contracts

QUESTION 2
Buyer opened a new automobile service station earlier this year. Buyer wanted to
buy a television set for the station so her customers could watch television while she
worked on their cars.
Buyer found the television set she wanted at Seller Sets, Inc. (“Seller”), a television
set retailer. A Seller salesperson told Buyer she could purchase the set for $300.
Buyer replied that she would like to “shop around”. The salesperson then wrote
“Seller Sets, Inc.– $300" on a sales brochure describing the set and gave the
brochure to Buyer. The printed phrase “Available for a Limited Time Only”
appeared at the top of the brochure. As the salesperson handed Buyer the
brochure he said, “I think you’ll find no one will beat our price.”
Not finding a better price, Buyer returned to Seller’s one week later to buy the
television set. However, the salesperson told her that the set was out of stock and
that Seller could not sell her another at the $300 price. Two months later, Buyer
purchased the same model set from another dealer for $450.
Buyer wishes to sue Seller, seeking damages for lost profits. Buyer intends to
allege that she lost customers because she has not had television in the station for
the past two months.
What theory or theories for recovery of damages will Buyer assert in her complaint
and what is her likelihood of success on each theory? Discuss.
14
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
I. What law applies: Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) or common law?
The UCC is the governing law for the sale of goods. Goods are movable
items and do not include services, real estate, or intangibles.
Here, the governing law is the UCC.
2. Is Seller a merchant as defined by the UCC?
The UCC defines merchant as someone who trades the types of goods in
question or holds themselves out to be knowledgeable regarding the goods.
Here, Seller is a television set retailer and is clearly a merchant.
Note: Seller's salesperson, since acting within the scope of her/his
employment, binds Seller Sets, Inc. to any contracts/offers, etc., that she
makes (respondeat superior).
3. Did Buyer and Seller have a contract for the sale of a TV set for $300?
A contract consists of an offer, an acceptance, and consideration. An offer
is a manifestation to be presently found or committed, communicated to
specific offerees, with definite subject matter and material terms. Under the
UCC, quantity and subject matter are generally the only two terms required.
Offer
Here, the salesperson clearly offers Buyer the television set for $300.
15
Acceptance
Acceptance is the manifest willingness to be presently bound to a valid offer.
It can be express or implied. Under the UCC acceptance can occur by a
means stipulated by the offer, or if no such means is provided, in any
reasonable manner.
Here, Buyer clearly does not accept Seller's offer because Buyer states that
she would like to “shop around.”
Therefore, as of the time of the Buyer's first visit to Seller Sets, there is no
contract between Seller and Buyer.
4. Did Seller make a Merchant Firm Offer to Buyer?
Under the UCC, an offer can remain open if supported by consideration (an
options contract) or if a merchant firm offer is made. A merchant firm offer
occurs when a merchant makes a signed writing to keep an offer open. The
offer remains open for the stated period of time not to exceed three months
or for a reasonable period of time if no time is stated, again not to exceed
three months.
Here, Seller is a merchant as discussed above. Seller wrote on the T.V.
sales brochure that described the set “Seller Sets, Inc. $300.” Buyer will
argue that this is a signed writing because of Seller's handwritten note.
Seller, on the other hand, will argue that Seller's writing is not a signature.
In general, the UCC favors contracts and a trier of fact may determine that
Seller's handwritten notes with the words “Seller Sets” constitutes a signing.
Here, no specific time is given for the length of the firm offer. Seller will
argue that the printed phrase “Available for a limited time only” suggests only
for a period of time in which Seller has inventory. Also, this phrase suggests
16
a short period of time. Buyer, on the other hand, would argue that one week,
the time in which the Buyer returned, is within a “limited time” and
furthermore one week is within a reasonable time as contemplated by the
UCC, which cuts off firm offers without consideration at three months.
Because one week is a reasonable time for holding open an offer to sell a
TV, Seller must keep its offer open for one week.
Therefore, Seller gave Buyer a merchant firm offer that was open for at least
one week.
Detrimental Reliance
In the event that Seller was not found to have made a merchant firm offer,
Buyer may argue that she detrimentally, reasonably, and foreseeably relied
upon Seller's statement that T.V.'s at $300 would be available.* If so, this
detrimental reliance in effect provides the consideration to keep Seller's offer
open.
*Here, in addition to the facts pertaining to the merchant firm offer, Seller
says Buyer will not find anyone that can beat Seller's price.
5. What damages can Buyer recover if Seller violated its merchant firm offer?
Assuming a merchant firm offer was made by Seller that stayed open for a
week, Seller broke that offer when Buyer returned a week later to purchase
the TV (Salesperson tells Buyer TV out of stock and could not sell Buyer
one at $300.)
17
Expectation Damages
Parties to a contract are awarded expectation damages—damages to make
them whole so that they receive the benefit of their bargain. Under the UCC,
when a seller breaches, by not providing the goods to buyer, buyer can
cover, that is purchase an identical or equivalent good and the seller owes
the buyer expectation damages equal to the difference in prices.
Here, Buyer covers her purchase by buying an identical TV two months later
at a $150 increase in price ($450 - $150). Seller may argue that Buyer
waited too long to cover herself and, if TV prices increased during this time,
Seller should not have to pay for such increases. Here, there are no facts
to support this and therefore Seller owes Buyer $150 in expectation
damages.
Consequential Damages
Consequential Damages may be awarded to the non-breaching party if at
the time of contract formation (in this case the merchant firm offer) the nonbreaching
party makes clear to the breaching party that there are special
circumstances that would not be obvious that would cause harm if the
contract were breached.
Here, Buyer does not tell Seller that the TV is necessary to retaining
customers at Buyer's service station, and Seller would have no reason to
know this. Furthermore, Buyer could have covered much sooner than two
months in order to mitigate damages (that is, loss of customers to the service
station). In addition, Seller would argue that Buyer's consequential damages
18
are too speculative, too remote, and cannot be reasonably determined by a
court because it would be hard to determine whether the lack of a TV
resulted in a specific number of customers not using Buyer's service station.
Therefore, Buyer will not recover consequential damages.
19
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
I. Governing Law—UCC or Common Law?
If Buyer can establish that a contract exists, it will be governed by the UCC because
this is a contract for the sale of goods, a TV (a movable object).
II. Do the parties have a contract?
A. Has there been an offer?
Seller is a party that deal in “goods of the kind,” and as such is defined within the
UCC as a merchant. Specifically, Seller is a TV set retailer, as stated in the fact
pattern. Therefore, the special rules for merchants' offers will apply. The
salesperson for Seller, as an agent of Seller, has provided Buyer with a brochure
describing the set, and salesperson wrote “Seller Sets, Inc.—$300" on the brochure.
Thus, the elements of a Merchant's Firm Offer are established: 1) price, 2) quantity
(implied to be one), 3) description of the product stated with specificity, and 4)
signed by the merchant. The courts have held that a written or printed business
name on the estimate or brochure may be held to construe a signed offer. Further,
under the objective theory of contracts, the brochure and statements made by
salesperson would induce a reasonable person to believe that had the power to
presently accept Seller's offer to sell one TV for $300. Under the Merchant's Firm
Offer rule, the merchant must hold the offer open to the offeree for a “reasonable
time,” not to exceed 3 months. Therefore, it would appear that there has been an
offer.
B. Is the offer still open?
20
As stated supra, under the Merchant's Firm offer rule, the merchant is required to
hold an offer open for a reasonable amount of time. Under these facts, Seller had
reason to know that Buyer intended to “shop around” a bit, and this is the reason
Seller's salesperson provided the brochure. The words, “Available for a Limited
Time Only” appeared on the brochure. Thus, when Buyer returned to purchase the
set he may have believed that this was within the “Limited Time.” Since this is an
ambiguous statement as to how long the offer will remain open, it will be up to the
court to determine if Buyer acted reasonably. Ordinarily, a merchant's firm offer
must be held open for a period not to exceed 3 months unless unambiguously
stated in the offer. Seller's offer is ambiguous on its face, and this will be an issue
for the court.
C. If the offer is still open—
If the court rules that one week was a reasonable time in which Buyer could return
and expect to be able to accept Seller's offer, then her act of returning to the store
prepared to make a perfect tender to purchase the set would have been an
acceptance on Buyer's part. Thus, a contract would have been formed.
D. If the offer was no longer open—
If the court rules that it would be unreasonable for Buyer to expect to be able to
purchase the set one week later, in light of the fact that the brochure clearly
indicated the special price was available for a limited time only, Buyer's actions
would be construed as an ineffective attempt to accept the offer. Under these facts,
no contract would have been formed.
21
III. If Buyer was reasonable in returning to the store one week later to purchase the
set, offered perfect tender, and expected to make a contract with Seller for one
TV, she has accepted the contract. When she was informed by Seller that
there were no more in stock, this was, in effect, a breach on the part of Seller.
Since it went directly to the essence of the contract (the TV), it is a material
breach on the part of Seller. Thus, Buyer could reasonably sue for damages.
Under the Merchants' Firm Offer rule, which appears to be in effect here, it is
likely that the court will rule in favor for Buyer as to whether the Seller should
have expected his brochure to induce reliance on the part of Buyer. A
reasonable person in Buyer's position would expect that he would be able to
accept the offer and form a contract with Seller. Thus, Buyer will be owed
some damages based on his reliance on Seller's statements.
A. Reliance—Compensatory Damages
Buyer will first state that based on her reliance on Seller's offer, she expected to be
able to purchase this model of TV for $300. Ultimately, she had to pay $450 for the
same model. Thus, she should be compensated for the difference in what she
actually paid and what she would have paid had the contract with Seller not been
breached. This amount, $150, is her compensatory damages. Buyer would be
under an obligation to mitigate her damages, and there are no facts presented to
indicate either that she did or did not. The fact that she waited two months to make
the purchase of a TV set, that it was the same model and that it was 50% more
expensive would all be factors for the court to consider in determining if Buyer was
reasonable in her attempt to mitigate her damages. She seems to have a strong
case, given her reliance on a merchant's firm offer.
22
B. Lost profits
Damages for lost profits must be established with reasonable certainty, and are
designed to place the plaintiff in the position they would have been in had the
contract been adequately performed. Here, that would mean, if Buyer had been
able to purchase the TV set from Seller as originally desired, how would that have
affected her business profits? Typically, lost profit damages are very difficult to
establish absent significant historical data to indicate some trend or pattern. Since
this was a new business, for Buyer, it will be especially difficult for her to establish
with the requisite specificity exactly how her business was harmed by the lack of a
TV in the waiting area of the station. Therefore, it is unlikely that she will recover
damages for lost profits.
IV. Seller's Defenses to whether there is a contract—
Buyer will be owed nothing if Seller can prove that there was no contract. This
might be achieved in either of two ways: 1) That Buyer's reliance was unreasonable,
and 2) claiming the statute of frauds as a defense to formation.
A. Buyer's unreasonable expectation to contract
As discussed supra, whether Buyer's expectation that she could presently accept
Seller's offer via the brochure is a matter for the court. Seller will argue that the
printed “Limited Time Only” should not have induced any reliance on Buyer's part
that she could expect to return one week later and purchase the TV set.
B. Statute of Frauds
Seller may raise an issue with the statute of frauds, but this would be ineffective,
since the Statute of Frauds provision applying to goods is applicable only to goods
of $500 or more. The TV was offered for $300, and therefore, is outside the Statute
of Frauds.


3. Criminal Law
QUESTION 3
Anna owned a business and stored insured business inventory at a warehouse
owned by Bob. Anna was experiencing financial problems and needed funds to pay
her creditors. Bob, after hearing of Anna’s money problems, suggested that they
hire someone to burn down the warehouse since he was planning to build
condominiums on the warehouse property and could use the insurance proceeds
for the construction of the condominiums. Bob told Anna that he knew someone
who would handle burning the warehouse in return for a percentage of the
insurance proceeds. Anna agreed and Bob contacted Cindy to burn down the
warehouse. Cindy obtained the location of the warehouse from Bob and proceeded
to set fire to the warehouse. Unbeknownst to Anna, Bob or Cindy, a homeless
person, Daryll, was living in the warehouse. Daryll died as a result of the fire.
After hearing about Daryll’s death, Anna and Bob decided not to make any
insurance claims. After an investigation Anna, Bob and Cindy were arrested.
With what crimes, if any, might Anna, Bob and Cindy be charged and what
defenses, if any, could each assert? Discuss.
24
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
I. Anna's Crimes
A. Conspiracy. A Conspiracy is where two or more people agree/intend
to commit an unlawful act and do something in furtherance of the act. Here,
after hearing of Anna's money, Bob suggested that they hire someone to burn
down the warehouse since Bob wanted to build condominiums on the
warehouse property and they could both use the insurance proceeds. Their
conspiracy was complete once Bob contacted Cindy to burn down the
warehouse—they have now done an act of doing something in furtherance of
their unlawful act. Both (sic) Bob, Anna and Cindy will be charged with
conspiracy to burn down (arson) the warehouse.
1 Pinkerton's Rule. This rule states that all co-conspirators will be
responsible for the unlawful acts of other co-conspirators done in
furtherance of the conspiracy. Here, Anna will be held responsible for all
acts done by Bob and Cindy to further their unlawful conspiracy.
B. Solicitation. Solicitation is when one encourages, asks, incites another
into committing an unlawful act. Here Anna would be charged with the
solicitation of Cindy because Bob asked Cindy to burn down the warehouse.
However, when Cindy agreed she then merged the crime of solicitation into
conspiracy.
C. Attempted Insurance Fraud. To be charged with the crime of attempt
the defendant must specifically intend to commit the unlawful act and do
something in furtherance to show that the defendant actually intended the
crime. Here, Anna will be charged with the intent to commit insurance fraud.
Because Anna and Bob agreed to commit arson in order to collect insurance
money. The attempt will be considered complete when Bob asked Cindy to
burn down the warehouse and Cindy set fire to the warehouse as instructed.
Even though Anna and Bob decided not to make any insurance claims they
25
will still be charged with attempted insurance fraud. It was because Daryll the
homeless man was killed that they did not want anyone to be suspicious of
them. And possible guilt of him dying that caused Anna and Bob to not go
through with their insurance claims. Anna will be charged with attempt to
commit insurance fraud.
D. Arson is when the defendant intentionally burns down the house of
another. Modernly, basically all structures are included, including one's own
business or property in order to collect insurance money. The burning must
be at least some type of charring to suffice, blackening will not. Here, Cindy
set the fire to the warehouse and we assume that it was burned because it
was significant enough to cause Daryll's death and burning also qualified
because Anna and Bob could collect insurance claims. The burning of the
warehouse was intentional as Anna and Bob conspired to have it burned down
by asking Cindy to burn it down for a percentage of the insurance proceeds.
Anna also burned her own property (business inventory) and the burning is
supposed to be of another's property. However if one commits arson with the
intention of collecting insurance money then this qualifies as arson because
Anna did so for illegal purposes. She also destroyed other people's property
that was destroyed in the warehouse.
E. Murder. A homicide is the unlawful killing of another human being. It will
be considered murder if malice is proved.
1. Malice. Malice will be proved if any of the following four elements
are met: 1) intent to kill (premeditation and deliberation); 2) intent to
seriously injure; 3) wanton and willful conduct (depraved heart); and 4) a
killing done in connection with a dangerous felony . Here, the state would
most likely focus on a killing done in connection with a dangerous felony
as this element and intent to kill/murder the defendant is eligible for a first
degree murder charge.
2. Felony-Murder. Felony murder is charged when the defendant kills
26
another human being in the course of a dangerous felony. For a felony
to qualify the felony must be considered extremely dangerous so as to
show dangers to other people. Most jurisdictions list dangerous felonies
as a killing during the commission of arson, rape, robbery, burglary or a
kidnaping. It does not matter that you did not intend to kill another person
but because of the dangerous situation involved in committing the felony
a death could foreseeably occur because of the defendant's actions.
Here, Anna conspired to commit the crime of arson, burning down the
warehouse and by doing so she was committing a dangerous felony
when Cindy went ahead and set fire to the warehouse. Because fire is
considered dangerous, a chance of loss of life is easily foreseeable, then
Anna will be charged with the felony murder of Daryll.
1. Involuntary manslaughter. Anna will claim that by her planning to
burn down the warehouse and Cindy burning it down that they did not
intend that Daryll would die. That the fire was an act of criminal
negligence and the felony-murder charge should be reduced to
involuntary manslaughter. However, this is an unlikely defense because
Anna planned on committing arson which qualifies as a dangerous felony
because it was foreseeable that another person might be seriously
injured or die because of their actions.
II. Bob's Crimes.
A. Conspiracy. See supra. Bob will be charged with the crime of conspiracy
as proven in the discussion above under Anna.
1. Pinkerton's Rule. Supra. Bob is a conspirator and has coconspirators.
He will be charged for any crimes by his co-conspirators in
furtherance of the crimes.
B. Solicitation. Supra.
27
C. Attempted Insurance Fraud. Supra.
D. Arson. Supra.
E. Murder. Supra.
1. Felony Murder. Supra.
2. Involuntary manslaughter. Supra.
III. Cindy's Crimes.
A. Conspiracy. Supra.
1. Pinkerton's Rule. Supra.
B. Attempted insurance fraud. Supra.
C. Arson. Supra.
D. Murder. Supra.
1. Felony Murder. Supra.
2. Involuntary Manslaughter. Supra.
28
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
People v. Anna
Conspiracy Liability
At common law a conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to
commit an overt illegal act or a legal act by illegal means. Modernly an overt act is
required. The Warton rule requires one more person in the agreement than is
necessary to commit the crime. A party may withdraw from a conspiracy provided
the withdraw [sic] is done voluntary [sic] (without duress of immediate
apprehension), is disclosed to all other parties of the conspiracy, and is in sufficient
time before the crime is committed. A party to a conspiracy is liable for the
foreseeable crimes committed by the other parties to the conspiracy prior to the
withdrawal.
Here Bob and Anna formed an agreement because “Anna agreed.” The agreement
was to burn down the warehouse, an arson. They committed an overt act by
contracting with Cindy to burn down the building. Arson is the malicious burning of
the dwelling of another. Modernly, the dwelling has been expanded to including
most structures and other places, i.e. forest, etc. . . . Likewise the structure can be
the defendant's own, if done with criminal intent, i.e., insurance fraud.
Therefore, Anna conspired with Bob to burn the warehouse with the intent of
defrauding the insurance company. (At common law, the act of the arson would not
be a crime since the structure was not a dwelling, but the intended result of
insurance fraud would be a crime, supra, and therefore would still result in a
conspiracy.
29
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT LARCENY/FRAUD
Conspiracy, defined supra.
Larceny is the trespasser taking and carrying away of the personal property of
another with the intent to permanently deprive. Fraud is larceny by trick through
misrepresentation of a fact to another to induce the other to give up personal
property.
Here Anna (and Bob) intended to burn down the warehouse to collect upon Bob's
insurance policy, the personal property of another, the insurance company. Anna
agreed to the act. The intent was to defraud the insurance company, an illegal act.
By contracting with Cindy an overt act was commenced.
Anna will be charged with Conspiracy to commit fraud.
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT SOLICITATION OF A CRIME
Conspiracy, defined supra.
Solicitation is the act of urging or encouraging another to commit a criminal act, with
the intent of the act being committed. The solicitation can be of any criminal act.
Modernly, however, at common law, the solicitation must have been for the
commission of a felony. If the act solicitated is committed the solicitation is merged
into the crime. Here Bob and Anna agreed to solicit Cindy to commit an arson, a
crime. When Bob and Anna contracted with Cindy to burn the warehouse they
committed an overt act and can be charged with conspiracy to solicit Cindy to
commit arson. Since the arson was committed, infra, the solicitation will merge into
the arson.
30
ARSON
Defined Supra.
Accomplice Liability
An accomplice in the first degree is one who is present at the time of the
commission of the crime who may not actually be the principal. An accomplice in
the second degree is not present at the time of the crime, but who has the intent to
commit the crime and who aids or abets the others in the commission of the crime.
Here, Anna was neither present, [n]or apparently aided nor abetted in the arson and
therefore would not be liable as [an] accomplice. However, as a member of a
conspiracy, supra, all parties are liable for the foreseeable criminal acts of the other
parties. Here Anna conspired to burn the structure. If Cindy committed Arson,
Anna would be held liable.
Based on conspiracy liability, at common law Anna would not be guilty of Arson
because the building was not a dwelling. However, modernly the dwelling has been
expanded and would include the warehouse. Because Cindy intentionally
(maliciously) burned the warehouse, Anna would be charged with Arson.
MURDER.
Murder is the unlawful killing of another human being with malice aforethought.
Malice aforethought is the intentional killing or implied killing through infliction of
great bodily harm, unreasonable risk to human life (depraved heart), commission
of felony or in some jurisdictions resisting lawful arrest. There must be a causation
between the act and the killing.
All murder is second degree unless it is premeditated, killing by enumerated means,
or during the commission of a dangerous felony. Then it is statutory first degree
murder. Arson, supra, is a dangerous felony.
31
Here a killing of another occurred because Daryll died. The killing was the actual
cause because but for the arson, Daryll would not have died. The arson is the
proximate cause of the killing because there were not unforeseen intervening
factors that negated the arson as the cause in fact of Daryll's death. Therefore the
killing was caused by the arson.
Felony first degree murder is applicable because arson is a dangerous felony.
Daryll's death is a result of and occurred during the arson. Further, since a
conspirator is responsible for the crimes committed by the other parties to the
conspiracy, that are foreseeable, which a death is foreseeable during an arson,
Anna would be responsible for Daryll's death and charged with Statutory first degree
murder.
Alternative second degree murder. In the event the jury does not believe that it was
foreseeable Daryll would be in there because the building was a warehouse and
people do not live in warehouses, the jury could find Anna responsible for second
degree murder under the theory of unjustifiable risk to human life since the burning
of any structure is an uncontrollable event and the likelihood is the fire can get out
of control, the agreement to burn the warehouse places human life in unjustifiable
risk.
DEFENSE TO MURDER: A mistake of fact, i.e., the warehouse is empty, does not
apply because a mistake of a fact is not a defense to a general intent crime, which
second degree murder and arson are both (sic).
There are not other defenses to the crime that are applicable.
ATTEMPT FRAUD: An attempt is a significant step towards the commission of a
crime coupled with the intent to commit the crime. An attempt can be for any form,
but the defendant must have the specific intent of desiring the commission of a[n]
actual crime. Fraud, supra, is a crime. Anna intended to partake in the fraud with
Bob of his insurance company. Here [sic] and Bob took a significant step towards
32
the crime then they hired Cindy to burn down the building. Anna will argue that the
significant step to the fraud is the filing of the insurance claims and because they
did not they did not take a significant step and therefore are not guilty of attempt[ed]
fraud. The prosecution will argue that one [sic] the burning occurred, the attempt
was in place, and it was too late to back out since a withdrawal of an attempt is
generally not a defense as the crime is the “attempt” and the specific means to
commit that crime. If not for the burning of the warehouse, Anna could argue the
significant step did not occur. However, Anna will be charged with attempt to
commit fraud.
PEOPLE V. BOB: Bob will be charged for the same reasons as set forth above for
Anna with crimes of conspiracy to commit arson, conspiracy to commit fraud,
murder and attempted fraud. In addition Bob will be charged with solicitation, supra,
of arson, and fraud.
Solicitation to commit arson, for the same reasons set forth in Anna. (In addition
Bob solicited Anna to commit arson.) Bob will not be charged with solicitation to
commit arson as the arson occurred and the solicitation is merged into that crime.
However, Bob did encourage Anna to commit fraud by suggesting they hire
someone to burn down the warehouse and collect the insurance proceeds, since
the fraud was not committed, Bob will be charged with solicitation of Anna to commit
fraud.
PEOPLE V. CINDY: As set forth above Cindy will be charged with conspiracy to
commit arson, arson and murder.


4. Torts

QUESTION 4
Craft Village is a small town that is popular with tourists because of its fine arts and
crafts stores. Craft Village has no public transportation. All of the stores are
located on Main Street. There is one large gallery, Northwoods Gallery, at the north
end of Main Street. At the south end of Main Street is the Snooze Inn, a large
motel. Tourists often stay at the Snooze Inn when they want to spend more than
a day in Craft Village. Craft Village shops, by town ordinance, must remain open
from at least 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day, including Sundays. All of the shops
close at 8:00 p.m. except Northwoods Gallery, which is open until 11:00 p.m. every
night. Craft Village provides street lighting along Main Street, which is turned on
each night at dusk.
Jean arrived in Craft Village on Sunday night for her annual shopping expedition.
As on all of her previous trips to Craft Village, she stayed at the Snooze Inn for two
nights. She does not own a car, and one of the reasons she likes Craft Village is
that she can walk to all the shops.
Jean got up on Monday morning to go shopping. She shopped all day, and walked
back to the Snooze Inn at 7:00 p.m. for dinner. After dinner, at around 8:30 p.m.,
she began walking to Northwoods Gallery. Half way there, she was accosted by a
mugger. The mugger stood in front of her and shouted, “Hand over your purse, or
I’ll beat you up!” The mugger roughly snatched Jean’s purse as she held it out to
him. The mugger fled, and Jean turned around and ran back to the Snooze Inn.
The mugger was later captured by the police.
On what theory or theories, if any, might Jean recover damages from, and what
defenses might she anticipate, in an action against:
1. The mugger? Discuss.
2. Craft Village? Discuss.
3. Northwoods Gallery? Discuss.
4. Snooze Inn? Discuss.
34
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
Jean v. Mugger
Assault
The intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an immediate
harm without consent or justification. When the mugger shouted at Jean to “Hand
over your purse, or I'll beat you up,” his conduct was volitional and therefore
intentional.
Mere words are adequate to cause apprehension. The words “hand over your
purse or I'll beat you up” coupled with the fact that he had the present ability to carry
the threat out indicates the placing of another in reasonable apprehension.
In addition, Jean held out the purse indicating that she was apprehensive. It
does not seem that Mugger had consent or justification.
Therefore, Mugger is liable for assault.
Battery
Battery is harmful or offensive touching of another without consent or
justification. When Mugger roughly snatched Jean's purse from her he touched an
item that was intimate to Jean's person, which was offensive.
Therefore, there was a touching of another. There is not consent due to the
fact Jean held her purse out because she was afraid and no justification.
Therefore Mugger is liable for battery.
TRESPASS TO CHATTEL
Trespass to chattel is the interference with the personal property of another.
35
When Mugger roughly snatched Jean's purse and fled he interfered with the
personal property, a purse, which belonged to Jean.
Jean gave no consent and Mugger was not justified in his behavior.
Thus, Mugger is liable for trespass to chattel.
Jean may recover damages caused by the interference.
CONVERSION
Conversion is the intentional exercise of dominion and control over the
personal property of another.
When Mugger snatched Jean's purse and fled he exercised dominion and
control over Jean's personal property contrary to Jean's possessory rights.
Therefore, Mugger is liable for conversion. Jean may recover for damages for
the cost of the purse including value of the purse in a forced sale or reasonable
rental value if returned, plus damages.
Jean v. Craft Village
Negligence
Craft Village may be liable to Jean for damage if it is found that Craft Village
owed a duty to Jean, that they breached their duty, which was the actual and
proximate cause of Jean's injuries.
DUTY—GENERAL DUTY
As a small town Craft Village owes a duty of due care not to subject visitors of
the town to unreasonable harm as a reasonable small town in the same or similar
circumstances.
36
It may be argued that because Craft Village was a small town, with no public
transportation, popular with tourists and all stores located on one main street that
they owed a duty of care to the patrons of the village to make the streets safe.
Especially in light of the fact the city required the stores to remain open until 8:00
p.m. which could be considered past dark and more inviting for crime.
Jean was a foreseeable plaintiff in that she was a tourist of the village out
shopping. Therefore, Craft Village owed a duty.
SPECIAL DUTY—LAND OCCUPIER
As a small town, Craft Village is the occupier of the city street, including Main
Street. Jean will argue that Jean is an invitee because she was on the street for the
purpose it was open to the public. Thus, Craft Village owed a duty to inspect,
discover, warn or correct any harm.
Even if Jean is determined to be a licensee Craft would owe a duty to warn or
make safe any known harm.
The facts do not indicate that Craft Village was aware of or had reason to
inspect for any incidents of crime. There is no special duty owed.
BREACH
Under the general duty of making the streets safe given the circumstances it
may be argued that because it is such a small town with a large concentration of
tourists in one location and keeping the business open after dark it is reasonable
to provide adequate protection by police or security on Main Street. Especially
because there is no public transport.
Therefore, by failing to provide security, Craft Village breached its duty.
37
Causation
Actual cause
But for failure to provide protection, Jean would not have been harmed.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable given the above mentioned circumstances that a tourist like
Jean would be mugged—Mugger is intervening force but Craft made crime more
likely to occur.
Thus, Craft Village is the proximate cause.
Damages
General damages for pain and suffering.
Special damages for loss of purse.
Defenses
Contributory Negligence
Conduct which falls below the standard of care for one's own protection.
Craft Village will argue that Jean went out on her own and did not protect
herself. However, no facts indicate Jean's conduct contributed to her own injury.
Not a valid defense.
Assumption of Risk
A party assumes the risk if he knowingly undertakes an activity with full
knowledge of the risk.
No facts indicate Jean knew the risk of a robbery occurring. Assumption of risk
is an invalid defense.
38
Immunity
As a city, Craft Village will seek immunity. However, the act of maintain[ing]
Main Street was proprietary in nature and not immune.
Jean v. Northwood Gallery (Northwoods)
Negligence
Defined supra.
Duty
Special duty—As a store owner Northwoods owed a duty to all its invitee
patrons to inspect, discover and warn of any dangers. However, Jean was not a
patron or even on Northwoods' property.
Therefore, there is no duty owed to Jean.
General Duty — Not to subject patrons to unreasonable harm. Northwoods owes
no general duty because Jean was not patron.
Jean v. Snooze Inn (Snooze)
Negligence
Defined supra.
Duty—as an innkeeper, Snooze owes a higher standard of care, including to protect
guests from harm and partake in a course of conduct which causes the least harm.
Jean was a guest and therefore a duty was owed.
Breach
By failing to provide protection or some type of shuttle service for its guests,
Snooze's actions were below the standard of care of a reasonable innkeeper in the
39
same or similar circumstances. Especially given the concentration of tourists which
increases the likelihood of crime. Thus Snooze breached its duty of care to Jean.
Causation
Actual Cause
But for Snooze's failure to adequately protect Jean, Jean would not have been
robbed.
Snooze is the actual cause.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable that it being after hours and in a tourist area that a person will
be robbed. Snooze will claim Mugger's actions were an intervening force.
However, Mugger's conduct was the type of harm they were obligated to protect
against, thus not superceding.
Thus, Snooze is the proximate cause.
Damages
As discussed under negligence of Craft Village. Jean is entitled to general and
special damages.
Defenses
Contributory Negligence
This will fail as discussed above.
Assumption of Risk
This will fail as discussed above.
Indemnity
If Snooze is found secondarily liable then they may seek indemnity from Craft
Village.
40
Contribution
Joint tortfeasor may seek reimbursement from other tortfeasor.
Craft Village and Snooze may file for contribution against each other.
41
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
Jean v. Mugger
1. Issue—Is Mugger Liable to Jean for Tortious Assault?
Under common law, assault is the voluntary act with intent to place another in
immediate apprehension of a battery (harmful/or offensive contact). Here Mugger,
expressly “threatened” Jean by saying, “Hand over your purse or I'll beat you up.”
This express threat is sufficient and of which Jean was aware to cause a reasonable
person in immediate apprehension of being beat up (harmful/offensive contact).
Therefore Mugger will be liable to Jean for assault.
2. Issue—Is Mugger liable to Jean for Tortious Battery?
Under common law, battery is the voluntary act with intent to cause
harmful/offensive contact and does cause such contact. Here, Mugger used his
threat to obtain the purse. Because Jean actually held her purse out to him, rather
than him taking it by force (no harmful/offensive contact occurred), Mugger will
probably not be liable for battery.
3. Issue—Is Mugger liable to Jean for Conversion?
Conversion is the unreasonable interference with another person's chattel to
sufficiently dispossess them of it. Here, Mugger's interference is the crime of
robbery (Trespassory taking and carrying away of personal property of another with
the intent to permanently deprive for the person/presence of through the use of
force or fear). Because his words and actions expressed that he intended to take
and keep the purse, which he in fact did, Mugger will be liable to Jean for
conversion.
42
Jean v. Craft Village
4. Issue—Can Craft Village be liable to Jean for negligence?
Negligence is the failure to use due care that a reasonable person would use in the
same or similar circumstances. A prima facie case of negligence requires the
showing of the elements of duty, breach, actual and proximate cause and damages.
5. Did Craft Village owe Jean a Duty?
Under common law, the duty owed is that of reasonable or due care under most
situations where there is a duty owed. Normally there is no duty to strangers,
absent a special relationship or statute. Where duty is owed by relationship, varying
standards of care may be imposed depending on the nature of the relationship.
Here, at minimum, the town is required to use due care in the protection of their
citizens and visitors.
6. Did Craft Village owe Jean a higher standard of duty?
Craft Village is a town [in] which streets are open to the public. Jean's status as a
public invitee (licensee) requires that the town exercise a higher standard of care.
The standard required is to warn of known dangers. If the town knew or should
have known they had a problem with crime, they have a duty to warn/repair.
7. Did Craft Village breach their duty?
Breach occurs when the defendant fails to use reasonable care. Here, the town
provided street lighting which may be viewed as a reasonable care to deter crimes
which often happen in the dark, such as robbery. The town also required all
businesses to remain open until 8:00, that could be to ensure that there are a lot of
people around during “core” hours, which provides another level of protection from
43
crime. However, if Craft knew or should have know they had a crime problem, and
these security features they've employed (lights, hours) are not sufficiently
reasonable to mitigate the threat of crime, they may be found to have breached their
duty. Absent their knowledge of the crime, Craft will not be found to have breached.
8. Was Craft Village actions the legal/proximate cause?
Unless it can be found that Craft Village failed to act reasonably in the protections
it provided, the town itself is not the legal or proximate cause of Jean's mugging, the
mugger is. Therefore the town will not be held responsible.
Jean v. Northwoods
9. Issue—Can Northwoods be liable to Jean in negligence?
Negligence and its elements are discussed above. Northwoods may owe a duty to
its customers to discover and repair all known dangers. Here, Jean only made it
halfway to the store, so she wasn't on the premises. However, Northwoods is the
only store that stays open until 11:00 pm at night. Therefore if it can be found that
Northwoods' late hours are not reasonable for the safety of its customers, they may
owe a duty to warn its customers of potential dangers to include criminal activity in
the area.
ACTUAL CAUSE — is the “cause in fact” of the harm done. PROXIMATE CAUSE
—is the legal scope of responsibility. Under Palsgraf, Cardozo asserted that one
is responsible for those plaintiffs in the zone of danger, however, Andrews asserted
a duty to one is a duty to all. Here, the Mugger is the “But, for” or cause in fact of
Jean's mugging (Damages). However, if Northwoods' late hours are a substantial
factor in her mugging (Jean wouldn't have been on the street after 8:00 because
the other stores close then), and on the street to the store is sufficiently within the
zone of danger, then Northwoods may be found to have had a duty which they
breached.
44
Jean v. Snooze Inn
10. Can Snooze Inn be liable to Jean for negligence?
Negligence (see supra). As an innkeeper, Snooze Inn owes a duty of care to its
patrons. Jean was a patron of the hotel as she stayed overnight for two days. The
standard of care of innkeepers is determined by a special relationship under which
Jean was an invitee. Under this standard, the hotel will have a duty to warn of all
known dangers, including a danger of criminal activity if they knew or should have
known. Absent the knowing of this fact, Snooze Inn, there are no facts to show that
Snooze failed to act reasonably. Therefore, they will not be liable to Jean for
Negligence.
11. Does Northwoods/Snooze/Craft have a defense of assumption of the risk?
Assumption of the risk is when a person knows and appreciates the nature of risks
inherent to an activity and assumes that risk by voluntarily proceeding with the
activity. Here, Jean, as a visitor, may not have known of the crime potential in the
town. However, the fact that all but one of the stores close at 8:00 pm may be an
indicator that the town does not want people on the streets after that time. The fact
that Northwoods was open until later may negate that logic. If a reasonable person
would not walk in the streets after 8:00 because of obvious dangers or risks
(especially to a woman traveling alone), the business and hotel may be able to
assert the defense of assumption of the risk. Assumption of the risk is a complete
bar to the plaintiff's recovery.
45
12. Does Northwoods/Snooze/Craft have a defense of comparative negligence?
At common law, a person has the responsibility to act reasonably for the protection
of their own self. Here if Jean was not acting reasonably in walking alone, after
dark, on an unoccupied street, the hotel/business may be able to assert
comparative negligence which is a partial bar to recovery. Jean's recovery will be
apportionately reduced by the percentage of fault attributed to her. In some
jurisdictions, comparative fault is a complete bar, if the percentage of fault of the
plaintiff is half or more (51%).