
June 2002

Criminal Law
Contracts
Criminal Law
Torts


QUESTION 1 Criminal Law
Debbie and Jon met in college and dated each other for two years. Debbie loved Jon very much and wanted to marry him. Jon always told her that he loved only her, but he told her he thought they were too young and should not rush into marriage.
One day as Debbie was putting gasoline into her car at the gasoline station, she looked into the car parked next to hers. She was enraged to see her best friend Vickie passionately kissing Jon. Debbie walked over to the car, with the fuel dispenser in her hand, and started yelling at Vickie and Jon. Vickie said, "I'm sorry you had to find out this way. Jon and I love each other and are going to get married."
Debbie was enraged and shouted, "You're not going to marry anyone, you slime!" She then pointed the gasoline dispenser at Vickie and sprayed her with gasoline, soaking her hair and clothes. Jon reached over to try to help Vickie. Unfortunately, he was smoking a cigarette. The cigarette ignited the gasoline and Vickie burned to death.
What offense or offenses has Debbie committed and what defenses, if any, would she assert? Discuss.


Assault
Battery
Murder
Voluntary Manslaughter
Involuntary Manslaughter
Mitigation
Insanity

QUESTION 2 Contracts
Buyer opened a new automobile service station earlier this year. Buyer wanted to buy a television set for the station so her customers could watch television while she worked on their cars.
Buyer found the television set she wanted at Seller Sets, Inc. ("Seller"), a television set retailer. A Seller salesperson told Buyer she could purchase the set for $300. Buyer replied that she would like to "shop around". The salesperson then wrote "Seller Sets, Inc.- $300" on a sales brochure describing the set and gave the brochure to Buyer. The printed phrase "Available for a Limited Time Only" appeared at the top of the brochure. As the salesperson handed Buyer the brochure he said, "I think you'll find no one will beat our price."
Not finding a better price, Buyer returned to Seller's one week later to buy the television set. However, the salesperson told her that the set was out of stock and that Seller could not sell her another at the $300 price. Two months later, Buyer purchased the same model set from another dealer for $450.
Buyer wishes to sue Seller, seeking damages for lost profits. Buyer intends to allege that she lost customers because she has not had television in the station for the past two months.
What theory or theories for recovery of damages will Buyer assert in her complaint and what is her likelihood of success on each theory? Discuss.


I. What law applies: Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) or common law?
2. Is Seller a merchant as defined by the UCC?
3. Did Buyer and Seller have a contract for the sale of a TV set for $300?
Offer
Acceptance
4. Did Seller make a Merchant Firm Offer to Buyer?
Detrimental Reliance
5. What damages can Buyer recover if Seller violated its merchant firm offer?
Assuming a merchant firm offer was made by Seller that stayed open for a week, Seller broke that offer when Buyer returned a week later to purchase the TV (Salesperson tells Buyer TV out of stock and could not sell Buyer one at $300.)
Expectation Damages
Consequential Damages
Offer lapses
A. Reliance-Compensatory Damages
B. Lost profits
IV. Seller's Defenses to whether there is a contract-
A. Buyer's unreasonable expectation to contract
B. Statute of Frauds

QUESTION 3 Criminal Law
Anna owned a business and stored insured business inventory at a warehouse owned by Bob. Anna was experiencing financial problems and needed funds to pay her creditors. Bob, after hearing of Anna's money problems, suggested that they hire someone to burn down the warehouse since he was planning to build condominiums on the warehouse property and could use the insurance proceeds for the construction of the condominiums. Bob told Anna that he knew someone who would handle burning the warehouse in return for a percentage of the insurance proceeds. Anna agreed and Bob contacted Cindy to burn down the warehouse. Cindy obtained the location of the warehouse from Bob and proceeded to set fire to the warehouse. Unbeknownst to Anna, Bob or Cindy, a homeless person, Daryll, was living in the warehouse. Daryll died as a result of the fire.
After hearing about Daryll's death, Anna and Bob decided not to make any insurance claims. After an investigation Anna, Bob and Cindy were arrested.
With what crimes, if any, might Anna, Bob and Cindy be charged and what defenses, if any, could each assert? Discuss.
23

ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
I. Anna's Crimes
A. Conspiracy. A Conspiracy is where two or more people agree/intend to commit an unlawful act and do something in furtherance of the act. Here, after hearing of Anna's money, Bob suggested that they hire someone to burn down the warehouse since Bob wanted to build condominiums on the warehouse property and they could both use the insurance proceeds. Their conspiracy was complete once Bob contacted Cindy to burn down the warehouse-they have now done an act of doing something in furtherance of their unlawful act. Both (sic) Bob, Anna and Cindy will be charged with conspiracy to burn down (arson) the warehouse.
1 Pinkerton's Rule. This rule states that all co-conspirators will be responsible for the unlawful acts of other co-conspirators done in furtherance of the conspiracy. Here, Anna will be held responsible for all acts done by Bob and Cindy to further their unlawful conspiracy.
B. Solicitation. Solicitation is when one encourages, asks, incites another into committing an unlawful act. Here Anna would be charged with the solicitation of Cindy because Bob asked Cindy to burn down the warehouse. However, when Cindy agreed she then merged the crime of solicitation into conspira cy.
C. Attempted Insurance Fraud. To be charged with the crime of attempt the defendant must specifically intend to commit the unlawful act and do something in furtherance to show that the defendant actually intended the crime. Here, Anna will be charged with the intent to commit insurance fraud. Because Anna and Bob agreed to commit arson in order to collect insurance money. The attempt will be considered complete when Bob asked Cindy to burn down the warehouse and Cindy set fire to the warehouse as instructed. Even though Anna and Bob decided not to make any insurance claims they
?????24

will still be charged with attempted insurance fraud. It was because Daryll the homeless man was killed that they did not want anyone to be suspicious of them. And possible guilt of him dying that caused Anna and Bob to not go through with their insurance claims. Anna will be charged with attempt to commit insurance fraud.
D. Arson is when the defendant intentionally burns down the house of another. Modernly, basically all structures are included, including one's own business or property in order to collect insurance money. The burning must be at least some type of charring to suffice, blackening will not. Here, Cindy set the fire to the warehouse and we assume that it was burned because it was significant enough to cause Daryll's death and burning also qualified because Anna and Bob could collect insurance claims. The burning of the warehouse was intentional as Anna and Bob conspired to have it burned d own by asking Cindy to burn it down for a percentage of the insurance proceeds. Anna also burned her own property (business inventory) and the burning is supposed to be of another's property. However if one commits arson with the intention of collecting insurance money then this qualifies as arson because Anna did so for illegal purposes. She also destroyed other people's property that was destroyed in the warehouse.
E. Murder. A homicide is the unlawful killing of another human being. It will be considered murder if malice is proved.
1. Malice. Malice will be proved if any of the following four elements are met: 1) intent to kill (premeditation and deliberation); 2) intent to seriously injure; 3) wanton and willful conduct (depraved heart); and 4) a killingdoneinconnectionwithadangerousfelony. Here,thestatewould most likely focus on a killing done in connection with a dangerous felony as this element and intent to kill/murder the defendant is eligible for a first degree murder charge.
2. Felony-Murder. Felony murder is charged when the defendant kills
???25

another human being in the course of a dangerous felony. For a felony to qualify the felony must be considered extremely dangerous so as to show dangers to other people. Most jurisdictions list dangerous felonies as a killing during the commission of arson, rape, robbery, burglary or a kidnaping. Itdoesnotmatterthatyoudidnotintendtokillanotherperson but because of the dangerous situation involved in committing the felony a death could foreseeably occur because of the defendant's actions. Here, Anna conspired to commit the crime of arson, burning down the warehouse and by doing so she was committing a dangerous felony when Cindy went ahead and set fire to the warehouse. Because fire is considered dangerous, a chance of loss of life is easily foreseeable, then Anna will be charged with the felony murder of Daryll.
1. Involuntary manslaughter. Anna will claim that by her planning to burn down the warehouse and Cindy burning it down that they did not intend that Daryll would die. That the fire was an act of criminal negligence and the felony-murder charge should be reduced to involuntary manslaughter. However, this is an unlikely defense because Anna planned on committing arson which qualifies as a dangerous felony because it was foreseeable that another person might be seriously injured or die because of their actions.
II. Bob's Crimes.
A. Conspira cy. See supra. Bob will be charged with the crime of conspiracy as proven in the discussion above under Anna.
1. Pinkerton's Rule. Supra. Bob is a conspirator and has co- conspirators. He will be charged for any crimes by his co-conspirators in furtherance of the crimes.
???B. Solicitation. Supra.
?26

C. Attempted Insurance Fraud. Supra.
D. Arson. Supra.
E. Murder. Supra.
1. Felony Murder. Supra.
2. Involuntary manslaughter. Supra.
III. Cindy's Crimes.
A. Conspiracy. Supra.
1. Pinkerton's Rule. Supra.
B. Attempted insurance fraud. Supra.
C. Arson. Supra.
D. Murder. Supra.
1. Felony Murder. Supra.
2. Involuntary Manslaughter. Supra.
?????????????27

People v. Anna Conspiracy Liability
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
?At common law a conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an overt illegal act or a legal act by illegal means. Modernly an overt act is required. The Warton rule requires one more person in the agreement than is necessary to commit the crime. A party may withdraw from a conspiracy provided the withdraw [sic] is done voluntary [sic] (without duress of immediate apprehension), is disclosed to all other parties of the conspiracy, and is in sufficient time before the crime is committed. A party to a conspiracy is liable for the foreseeable crimes committed by the other parties to the conspiracy prior to the withdrawal.
Here Bob and Anna formed an agreement because "Anna agreed." The agreement was to burn down the warehouse, an arson. They committed an overt act by contractingwithCindytoburndownthebuilding. Arsonisthemaliciousburningof the dwelling of another. Modernly, the dwelling has been expanded to including most structures and other places, i.e. forest, etc. . . . Likewise the structure can be the defendant's own, if done with criminal intent, i.e., insurance fraud.
Therefore, Anna conspired with Bob to burn the warehouse with the intent of defrauding the insurance company. (At common law, the act of the arson would not be a crime since the structure was not a dwelling, but the intended result of insurance fraud would be a crime, supra, and therefore would still result in a conspira cy.
28

CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT LARCENY/FRAUD
Conspiracy, defined supra.
Larceny is the trespasser taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive. Fraud is larceny by trick through misrepresentation of a fact to another to induce the other to give up personal property.
Here Anna (and Bob) intended to burn down the warehouse to collect upon Bob's insurance policy, the personal property of another, the insurance company. Anna agreed to the act. The intent was to defraud the insurance company, an illegal act. By contracting with Cindy an overt act was commenced.
Anna will be charged with Conspiracy to commit fraud.
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT SOLICITATION OF A CRIME
Conspiracy, defined supra.
Solicitation is the act of urging or encouraging another to commit a criminal act, with the intent of the act being committed. The solicitation can be of any criminal act.
Modernly, however, at common law, the solicitation must have been for the commission of a felony. If the act solicitated is committed the solicitation is merged into the crime. Here Bob and Anna agreed to solicit Cindy to commit an arson, a crime. When Bob and Anna contracted with Cindy to burn the warehouse they committed an overt act and can be charged with conspiracy to solicit Cindy to commit arson. Since the arson was committed, infra, the solicitation will merge into the arson.
29

ARSON Defined Supra.
Accomplice Liability
An accomplice in the first degree is one who is present at the time of the commission of the crime who may not actually be the principal. An accomplice in the second degree is not present at the time of the crime, but who has the intent to commit the crime and who aids or abets the others in the commission of the crime. Here, Anna was neither present, [n]or apparently aided nor abetted in the arson and therefore would not be liable as [an] accomplice. However, as a member of a conspiracy,supra,allpartiesareliablefortheforeseeablecriminalactsoftheother parties. Here Anna conspired to burn the structure. If Cindy committed Arson, Anna would be held liable.
Based on conspiracy liability, at common law Anna would not be guilty of Arson because the building was not a dwelling. However, modernly the dwelling has been expanded and would include the warehouse. Because Cindy intentionally (maliciously) burned the warehouse, Anna would be charged with Arson.
MURDER.
Murder is the unlawful killing of another human being with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought is the intentional killing or implied killing through infliction of great bodily harm, unreasonable risk to human life (depraved heart), commission of felony or in some jurisdictions resisting lawful arrest. There must be a causation between the act and the killing.
All murder is second degree unless it is premeditated, killing by enumerated means, or during the commission of a dangerous felony. Then it is statutory first degree murder. Arson, supra, is a dangerous felony.
30

Here a killing of another occurred because Daryll died. The killing was the actual cause because but for the arson, Daryll would not have died. The arson is the proximate cause of the killing because there were not unforeseen intervening factors that negated the arson as the cause in fact of Daryll's death. Therefore the killing was caused by the arson.
Felony first degree murder is applicable because arson is a dangerous felony. Daryll's death is a result of and occurred during the arson. Further, since a conspirator is responsible for the crimes committed by the other parties to the conspiracy, that are foreseeable, which a death is foreseeable during an arson, Anna would be responsible for Daryll's death and charged with Statutory first degree murder.
Alternat ive second degree murder. In the event the jury does not believe that it was foreseeable Daryll would be in there because the building was a warehouse and people do not live in warehouses, the jury could find Anna responsible for second degree murder under the theory of unjustifiable risk to human life since the burning of any structure is an uncontrollable event and the likelihood is the fire can get out of control, the agreement to burn the warehouse places human life in unjustifiable risk.
DEFENSE TO MURDER: A mistake of fact, i.e., the warehouse is empty, does not apply because a mistake of a fact is not a defense to a general intent crime, which second degree murder and arson are both (sic).
There are not other defenses to the crime that are applicable.
ATTEMPT FRAUD: An attempt is a significant step towards the commission of a crime coupled with the intent to commit the crime. An attempt can be for any form, but the defendant must have the specific intent of desiring the commission of a[n] actual crime. Fraud, supra, is a crime. Anna intended to partake in the fraud with Bob of his insurance company. Here [sic] and Bob took a significant step towards
31

the crime then they hired Cindy to burn down the building. Anna will argue that the significant step to the fraud is the filing of the insurance claims and because they did not they did not take a significant step and therefore are not guilty of attempt[ed] fraud. The prosecution will argue that one [sic] the burning occurred, the attempt was in place, and it was too late to back out since a withdrawal of an attempt is generally not a defense as the crime is the "attempt" and the specific means to commit that crime. If not for the burning of the warehouse, Anna could argue the significant step did not occur. However, Anna will be charged with attempt to commit fraud.
PEOPLE V. BOB: Bob will be charged for the same reasons as set forth above for Anna with crimes of conspiracy to commit arson, conspiracy to commit fraud, murder and attempted fraud. In addition Bob will be charged with solicitation, supra, of arson, and fraud.
Solicitation to commit arson, for the same reasons set forth in Anna. (In addition Bob solicited Anna to commit arson.) Bob will not be charged with solicitation to commit arson as the arson occurred and the solicitation is merged into that crime.
However, Bob did encourage Anna to commit fraud by suggesting they hire someone to burn down the warehouse and collect the insurance proceeds, since the fraud was not committed, Bob will be charged with solicitation of Anna to commit fraud.
PEOPLE V. CINDY: As set forth above Cindy will be charged with conspiracy to commit arson, arson and murder.
??32

QUESTION 4 Torts
Craft Village is a small town that is popular with tourists because of its fine arts and crafts stores. Craft Village has no public transportation. All of the stores are located on Main Street. There is one large gallery, Northwoods Gallery, at the north end of Main Street. At the south end of Main Street is the Snooze Inn, a large motel. Tourists often stay at the Snooze Inn when they want to spend more than a day in Craft Village. Craft Village shops, by town ordinance, must remain open from at least 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day, including Sundays. All of the shops close at 8:00 p.m. except Northwoods Gallery, which is open until 11:00 p.m. every night. Craft Village provides street lighting along Main Street, which is turned on each night at dusk.
Jean arrived in Craft Village on Sunday night for her annual shopping expedition. As on all of her previous trips to Craft Village, she stayed at the Sn ooze Inn f or two nights. She does not own a car, and one of the reasons she likes Craft Village is that she can walk to all the shops.
Jean got up on Monday morning to go shopping. She shopped all day, and walked back to the Snooze Inn at 7:00 p.m. for dinner. After dinner, at around 8:30 p.m., she began walking to Northwoods Gallery. Half way there, she was accosted by a mugger. The mugger stood in front of her and shouted, "Hand over your purse, or I'll beat you up!" The mugger roughly snatched Jean's purse as she held it out to him. The mugger fled, and Jean turned around and ran back to the Snooze Inn. The mugger was later captured by the police.
On what theory or theories, if any, might Jean recover damages from, and what defenses might she anticipate, in an action against:
1. The mugger? Discuss.
2. Craft Village? Discuss.
3. Northwoods Gallery? Discuss. 4. Snooze Inn? Discuss.
33

Jean v. Mugger
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
?Assault
The intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an immediate
harm without consent or justification. When the mugger shouted at Jean to "Hand over your purse, or I'll beat you up," his conduct was volitional and therefore intentional.
Mere words are adequate to cause apprehension. The words "hand over your purse or I'll beat you up" coupled with the fact that he had the present ability to carry the threat out indicates the placing of another in reasonable apprehension.
In addition, Jean held out the purse indicating that she was apprehensive. It does not seem that Mugger had consent or justification.
Therefore, Mugger is liable for assault.
Battery
Battery is harmful or offensive touching of another without consent or
justification. When Mugger roughly snatched Jean's purse from her he touched an item that was intimate to Jean's person, which was offensive.
Therefore, there was a touching of another. There is not consent due to the fact Jean held her purse out because she was afraid and no justification.
Therefore Mugger is liable for battery.
TRESPASS TO CHATTEL
Trespass to chattel is the interference with the personal property of another.
???34

When Mugger roughly snatched Jean's purse and fled he interfered with the personal property, a purse, which belonged to Jean.
Jean gave no consent and Mugger was not justified in his behavior. Thus, Mugger is liable for trespass to chattel.
Jean may recover damages caused by the interference.
CONVERSION
Conversion is the intentional exercise of dominion and control over the
personal property of another.
When Mugger snatched Jean's purse and fled he exercised dominion and control over Jean's personal property contrary to Jean's possessory rights.
Therefore, Mugger is liable for conversion. Jean may recover for damages for the cost of the purse including value of the purse in a forced sale or reasonable rental value if returned, plus damages.
Jean v. Craft Village Negligence
Craft Village may be liable to Jean for damage if it is found that Craft Village owed a duty to Jean, that they breached their duty, which was the actual and proximate cause of Jean's injuries.
DUTY-GENERAL DUTY
As a small town Craft Village owes a duty of due care not to subject visitors of
the town to unreasonable harm as a reasonable small town in the same or similar circumstances.
???35

It may be argued that because Craft Village was a small town, with no public transportation, popular with tourists and all stores located on one main street that they owed a duty of care to the patrons of the village to make the streets safe. Especially in light of the fact the city required the stores to remain open until 8:00 p.m. which could be considered past dark and more inviting for crime.
Jean was a foreseeable plaintiff in that she was a tourist of the village out shopping. Therefore, Craft Village owed a duty.
SPECIAL DUTY-LAND OCCUPIER
As a small town, Craft Village is the occupier of the city street, including Main
Street. Jean will argue that Jean is an invitee because she was on the street for the purpose it was open to the public. Thus, Craft Village owed a duty to inspect, discover, warn or correct any harm.
Even if Jean is determined to be a licensee Craft would owe a duty to warn or make safe any known harm.
The facts do not indicate that Craft Village was aware of or had reason to inspect for any incidents of crime. There is no special duty owed.
BREACH
Under the general duty of making the streets safe given the circumstances it
may be argued that because it is such a small town with a large concentration of tourists in one location and keeping the business open after dark it is reasonable to provide adequate protection by police or security on Main Street. Especially because there is no public transport.
Therefore, by failing to provide security, Craft Village breached its duty.
?36

Causation
Actual cause
But for failure to provide protection, Jean would not have been harmed.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable given the above mentioned circumstances that a tourist like
Jean would be mugged-Mugger is intervening force but Craft made crime more likely to occur.
Thus, Craft Village is the proximate cause.
Damages
General damages for pain and suffering. Special damages for loss of purse.
Defenses
Contributory Negligence
Conduct which falls below the standard of care for one's own protection.
Craft Village will argue that Jean went out on her own and did not protect herself. However, no facts indicate Jean's conduct contributed to her own injury. Not a valid defense.
Assumption of Risk
A party assumes the risk if he knowingly undertakes an activity with full
knowledge of the risk.
No facts indicate Jean knew the risk of a robb ery occurring. Assumption of risk is an invalid defense.
???????37

Immunity
As a city, Craft Village will seek immunity. However, the act of maintain[ing]
Main Street was proprietary in nature and not immune.
Jean v. Northwood Gallery (Northwoods) Negligence
Defined supra.
Duty
Special duty-As a store owner Northwoods owed a duty to all its invitee
patrons to inspect, discover and warn of any dangers. However, Jean was not a patron or even on Northwoods' property.
Therefore, there is no duty owed to Jean.
General Duty - Not to subject patrons to unreasonable harm. Northwoods owes no general duty because Jean was not patron.
Jean v. Snooze Inn (Snooze) Negligence
Defined supra.
Duty-as an innkeeper, Snooze owes a higher standard of care, including to protect guests from harm and partake in a course of conduct which causes the least harm.
Jean was a guest and therefore a duty was owed.
Breach
By failing to provide protection or some type of shuttle service for its guests,
Snooze's actions were below the standard of care of a reasonable innkeeper in the
????????38

same or similar circumstances. Especially given the concentration of tourists which increases the likelihood of crime. Thus Snooze breached its duty of care to Jean.
Causation
Actual Cause
But for Snooze's failure to adequately protect Jean, Jean would not have been robbed.
Snooze is the actual cause.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable that it being after hours and in a tourist area that a person will
be robbed. Snooze will claim Mugger's actions were an intervening force. However, Mugger's conduct was the type of harm they were obligated to protect against, thus not superceding.
Thus, Snooze is the proximate cause.
Damages
As discussed under negligence of Craft Village. Jean is entitled to general and
special damages.
Defenses
Contributory Negligence
This will fail as discussed above.
Assumption of Risk
This will fail as discussed above.
Indemnity
If Snooze is found secondarily liable then they may seek indemnity from Craft
Village.
????????39

Contribution
Joint tortfeasor may seek reimbursement from other tortfeasor.
Craft Village and Snooze may file for contribution against each other.
?40

Jean v. Mugger
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
?1. Issue-Is Mugger Liable to Jean for Tortious Assault?
Under common law, assault is the voluntary act with intent to place another in immediate apprehension of a battery (harmful/or offensive contact). Here Mugger, expressly "threatened" Jean by saying, "Hand over your purse or I'll beat you up." This express threat is sufficient and of which Jean was aware to cause a reasonable person in immediate apprehension of being beat up (harmful/offensive contact). Therefore Mugger will be liable to Jean for assault.
2. Issue-Is Mugger liable to Jean for Tortious Battery?
Under common law, battery is the voluntary act with intent to cause harmful/offensive contact and does cause such contact. Here, Mugger used his threat to obtain the purse. Because Jean actually held her purse out to him, rather than him taking it by force (no harmful/offensive contact occurred), Mugger will probably not be liable for battery.
3. Issue-Is Mugger liable to Jean for Conversion?
Conversion is the unreasonable interference with another person's chattel to sufficiently dispossess them of it. Here, Mugger's interference is the crime of robbery (Trespassory taking and carrying away of personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive for the person/presence of through the use of force or fear). Because his words and actions expressed that he intended to take and keep the purse, which he in fact did, Mugger will be liable to Jean for conversion.
???41

Jean v. Craft Village
4. Issue-Can Craft Village be liable to Jean for negligence?
Negligence is the failure to use due care that a reasonable person would use in the same or similar circumstances. A prima facie case of negligence requires the showing of the elements of duty, breach, actual and proximate cause and damages.
5. Did Craft Village owe Jean a Duty?
Under common law, the duty owed is that of reasonable or due care under most situations where there is a duty owed. Normally there is no duty to strangers, absent a special relationship or statute. Where duty is owed by relationship, varying standards of care may be imposed depending on the nature of the relationship. Here, at minimum, the town is required to use due care in the protection of their citizens and visitors.
6. Did Craft Village owe Jean a higher standard of duty?
Craft Village is a town [in] which streets are open to the public. Jean's status as a public invitee (licensee) requires that the town exercise a higher standard of care. The standard required is to warn of known dangers. If the town knew or should have known they had a problem with crime, they have a duty to warn/repair.
7. Did Craft Village breach their duty?
Breach occurs when the defendant fails to use reasonable care. Here, the town provided street lighting which may be viewed as a reasonable care to deter crimes which often happen in the dark, such as robbery. The town also required all businesses to remain open until 8:00, that could be to ensure that there are a lot of people around during "core" hours, which provides another level of protection from
?????42

crime. However, if Craft knew or should have know they had a crime problem, and these security features they've employed (lights, hours) are not sufficiently reasonable to mitigate the threat of crime, they may be found to have breached their duty. Absenttheirknowledgeofthecrime,Craftwillnotbefoundtohavebreached.
8. Was Craft Village actions the legal/proximate cause?
Unless it can be found that Craft Village failed to act reasonably in the protections it provided, the town itself is not the legal or proximate cause of Jean's mugging, the mugger is. Therefore the town will not be held responsible.
Jean v. Northwoods
9. Issue-Can Northwoods be liable to Jean in negligence?
Negligence and its elements are discussed above. Northwoods may owe a duty to its customers to discover and repair all known dangers. Here, Jean only made it halfway to the store, so she wasn't on the premises. However, Northwoods is the only store that stays open until 11:00 pm at night. Therefore if it can be found that Northwoods' late hours are not reasonable for the safety of its customers, they may owe a duty to warn its customers of potential dangers to include criminal activity in the area.
ACTUAL CAUSE - is the "cause in fact" of the harm done. PROXIMATE CAUSE -is the legal scope of responsibility. Under Palsgraf, Cardozo asserted that one is responsible for those plaintiffs in the zone of da nger, however, Andrews asserted a duty to one is a duty to all. Here, the Mugger is the "But, for" or cause in fact of Jean's mugging (Damages). However, if Northwoods' late hours are a substantial factor in her mugging (Jean wouldn't have been on the street after 8:00 because the other stores close then), and on the street to the store is sufficiently within the zone of danger, then Northwoods may be found to have had a duty which they breached.
???43

Jean v. Snooze Inn
10. Can Snooze Inn be liable to Jean for negligence?
Negligence (see supra). As an innkeeper, Snooze Inn owes a duty of care to its patrons. Jean was a patron of the hotel as she stayed overnight for two days. The standard of care of innkeepers is determined by a special relationship under which Jean was an invitee. Under this standard, the hotel will have a duty to warn of all known dangers, including a danger of criminal activity if they knew or should ha ve known. Absent the knowing of this f act, Sno oze Inn, there are no facts to show that Snooze failed to act reasonably. Therefore, they will not be liable to Jean for Negligence.
11. Does Northwoods/Snooze/Craft have a defense of assumption of the risk?
Assumption of the risk is when a person knows and appreciates the nature of risks inherent to an activity and assumes that risk by voluntarily proceeding with the activity. Here,Jean,asavisitor,maynothaveknownofthecrimepotentialinthe town. However, the fact that all but one of the stores close at 8:00 pm may be an indicator that the town does not want people on the streets after that time. The fa ct that Northwoods was open until later may negate that logic. If a reasonable person would not walk in the streets after 8:00 because of obvious dangers or risks (especially to a woman traveling alone), the business and hotel may be able to assert the defense of assumption of the risk. Assumption of the risk is a complete bar to the plaintiff's recovery.
???44

12. Does Northwoods/Snooze/Craft have a defense of comparative negligence?
At common law, a person has the responsibility to act reasonably for the protection of their own self. Here if Jean was not acting reasonably in walking alone, after dark, on an unoccupied street, the hotel/business may be able to assert comparative negligence which is a partial bar to recovery. Jean's recovery will be apportionately reduced by the percentage of fault attributed to her. In some jurisdictions, comparative fault is a complete bar, if the percentage of fault of the plaintiff is half or more (51%).
?45

??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2002
California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2002 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2002 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for
??the essay examination appear on
Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
page ii.
Subject Page
Contracts 1 Criminal Law 11 Contracts 21
???Torts
29
ii

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remembe r legal principles . Instead, try t o demonstrat e your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?iii

Question 1
Windco manufactures and installs insulated window-frame units. Installation comprises about 15% of Windco's total price for the units.
Sam, a commercial builder, saw a Windco advertisement and mailed an order for thirty window frames, at $100 per frame, for a total order of $3,000. He also wrote on his order, "Must have your guarantee of installation within 15 days due to construction deadlines."
Windco immediately sent Sam an "Acknowledgment of Order," listing the windows and price as per Sam's order, and including a $200 shipping charge. Shipping costs are customarily borne by the buyer of window-frame units. At the bottom of the Windco form was printed the following: "Installation guaranteed within 60 days." Also printed in bold and conspicuous type was the following: "All warranties of merchantability and fitness are hereby expressly disclaimed." Finally, the form stated, "Contract of Sale Subject to Terms Contained Herein."
Windco installed the windows 55 days after the order was placed and Sam incurred several delay-related expenses. Windco later submitted a bill for the full amount shown on the "Acknowledgment of Order" form. Sam refused to pay the $200 shipping charges. He also discovered that because of a manufacturing defect, the glass in the windows did not fit snugly, permitting rain to leak through.
Windco sued Sam for the full price shown on the "Acknowledgment of Order" form. Sam counterclaimed against Windco for damages resulting from the delayed installation and unmerchantable quality of the windows.
How should the court rule on Windco's and Sam's actions? Discuss.
?-1-

Answer A to Question 1
1. Windco v. Sam - Full Price
Windco is suing on the contract (K) and must first show that all enforceable K was formed, i.e., mutual assent, consideration & no defenses to K formation.
A. Mutual assent. 1. Offer.
a. Advertisement. An advertisement is generally not an offer absent an identified group of offerees to which the ad is communicated, quantity & subject matter. Here, the ad is likely not the offer.
2. Sam's writing. An offer is a manifestation of present interest to be bound to sufficiently definite essential terms. Sam's writing contained quantity (30), subject matter (window frames), price ($100 each) and his identity. His note to have installation within 15 days manifested his intent to be bound. This was an offer.
2. Acceptance.
a. Governing law. Acceptance and terms included turn on governing law. Here 85%, or the main purpose of the K, involved the sale of goods. Goods are moveable personal property; here, window frames. Sale of goods are governed by UCC.
b. Acknowledgment of Order. An acceptance is a manifestation by the offeror of present intent to be bound to the terms of the offer. Here, Windco sent an acknowledgment of order. Typically, an acknowledgment of receipt of order is not sufficient manifestation to be bound, so this was not necessarily an acceptance. However, UCC permits acceptance by any reasonable means.
c. Installing. Therefore, the fact that Windco performed and installed the frames will be Windco's acceptance, because acceptance can be made by conduct.
3. Terms.
a. Merchants. A merchant is one who deals in the course of business with goods of the kind or holds himself out as having special skills in the area. Here, Windco was in the business of
???????????-2-

window frames, i.e., a merchant, and Sam was a commercial builder. Sam was a merchant, because he regularly dealt with and had skills in the area of windows. UCC's merchant-to- merchant rules will apply.
b. New terms between merchants. Between merchants, new and additional terms are included in the agreement unless: the offer was expressly conditional upon the offeror's terms, or acceptance was limited to the terms of the acceptance or the offeree objects to the new terms within 10 days.
(i) Sam's written note - Time for performance.
Here, Sam will argu e that his "must have guarantee - - - within 15 days..." was a term on which his offer was expressly conditioned, and that therefore Windco's change to "within 60 days" is not included. However, Windco will argue that Sam's wording did not say: "expressly conditional upon" or "offer limited to . . ." & that Sam's words were only a desire, not an express condition. Windco will likely prevail & the term is 60 days for installation.
(ii) Shipping charge & parol evidence.
Windco will argue that its additional term "$200 shipping charge" was included, because Sam didn't object within 10 days. In support, Windco will offer parol evidence of the custom in the industry that shipping is borne by the buyer (here: Sam).
Sam will say that oral evidence of prior or contemporaneous terms are not admissible if the writing was fully integrated. Sam will also argue that the additional $200 is material & onerous & changed the bargain & that therefore the $200 is not included.
Windco will however be able to introduce oral evidence
to explain & clarify what the shipping term was intended to be and what is customary in the trade, as such explanatory evidence is not barred by the parol evidence rule. Also, $200 on top of $3,000 total is not a material additional charge, so Windco will likely prevail & the $200 term is included.
B. Consideration is the bargained-for exchange of acts or promises incurring a benefit as well as new legal detriment to both parties. Here, Sam obtained goods (benefit) in exchange for having to pay Windco (new detriment). Vice versa for Windco.
????-3-

1. Promissory estoppel. If for any reason an enforceable K is not found, promissory estoppel is a substitute where one party has reasonably relied to his detriment on the other's promise. Here, Windco went ahead with the installation & supplied the frames. Doing so, it detrimentally relied on Sam's promise.
Consideration or its substitute existed. C. Defenses to Formation
1. Statute of Frauds (SOF). SOF requires Ks for goods valued at $500 or more to be in a sufficient writing. Here, the K was for a total of $3,000 and had to be in writing. Since Sam is the one to be charged the $200 in dispute, his signature was required by SOF, but the "Ack of Order" was on Windco letterhead.
a. Merchant's confirming memo. Where one merchant sends the other a memo confirming an agreement that the other has reason to know of and understand, the memo suffices as a writing under SOF even if not signed by the one to be charged. Here, since the Ack of Order contained subject matter (windows), identity of the parties, price & Windco's signature (or on Windco's letterhead), SOF is satisfied.
b. Divisible K. It can also be argued that the contract was a sequence of contracts, each for $100, and that each such K therefore was not within SOF. The $200 would then be for installation services (governed by common law; not UCC) which do not fall within the SOF goods provision. Since the services were to be provided within one year (here: within 60 days), that SOF provision also doesn't require a writing signed by Sam.
An enforceable K was formed with terms $200 shipping & installation within 60 days.
D. Recovery.
1. Expectation interest. Windco will recover its expectation interest, i.e., the price it expected to obtain under the contract, which was $3,000 + $200 shipping. Even if the court decides the $200 term was not part of the K, Windco will get $3,000.
2. Consequential & Delay damages. It W can show that it suffered damages as a consequence of not receiving Sam's payment on time, it will be awarded also consequential damages, i.e., those amounts reasonably foreseeable to flow from Sam's breach at K formation time. Here, since Sam is refusing only to pay the $200 (not the $3,000), consequentials shouldn't apply.
????????-4-

II. Sam v. Windco. A. Recovery
1. Consequentials. If the court finds that the time to performance was within 15 days, then Sam will recover consequentials (defined supra). Delay damages that both parties knew or should have known would result from Windco's failure to install timely would be recoverable.
B. Breach of implied warranty.
Each product put into the stream of commerce carries an implied warranty that the goods are suited for their ordinary use. Here, window frames should be suited for use when it's raining, i.e., not leak[ing].
1. Parties. Plaintiff must be a purchaser or user. Here, Sam was the purchaser of the windows. Defendant must be one generally in the commercial supply chain. Here, Windco was (see supra under merchants). The parties are proper.
2. Merchantable. Defined supra. The product was defective due to a manufacturing defect in that the glass didn't fit properly; thus not fit for ordinary use (not merchantable).
3. Defenses. Windco will assert that it disclaimed all warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. Such a disclaimer is effective if conspicuous, as here printed in bold. Sam will however argue his purpose for entering into the K was to obtain windows that were functional and that Windco will be unjustly enriched if allowed to not compensate him so he can obtain other substitute goods (to "cover") & be reimbursed by Windco for his expenses therefor.
4. Perfect tender rule. Under the UCC, where goods are to be delivered in a single delivery, the buyer (here: Sam) has a right to obtain perfectly conforming goods. Even though Sam didn't discover the defect (non-conformity) of the goods until later, he can still reject the lot, accept the lot or any portion thereof, upon timely notice to Windco. If Windco still has time under the contract (5 days left from 55 to 60 days) to perform it has a right to cure by replacing the windows.
????????-5-

WINDCO v. SAM
Does the UCC Apply?
Answer B to Question 1
??The UCC applies to all contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are moveable, tangible property.
Here, the subject matter is shown to [be] predominately goods because "installation comprises 15% of Windco's total price."
Therefore, the UCC applies. Merchants?
A merchant is one who regularly deals in goods of this kind or who, by his occupation, has some special skill or knowledge as to this type of goods.
Here, "Windco manufactures and installs insulated window-frame units" and Sam, "a commercial dealer," likely has special knowledge of windows.
Therefore, both parties are merchants.
Valid Contract
In order to determine if any rights exist we first must determine if there is a valid, enforceable contract. A contract consists of an offer, acceptance, consideration and lack of formation defenses.
Offer
An offer is manifestation of present contractual intent, communicated to an identified offeree, containing definite and certain terms.
Here, Windco's ad will be considered only an invitation to accept offers. When Sam mailed this order form he made an offer to Windco, containing terms (30 window frames @$100/frame). A reasonable person would believe Sam made a commitment to enter a contract because of this information.
Therefore, there is a valid offer.
Acceptance and Acceptance With Addition[al] Terms UCC2-207
An acceptance is an unequivocal assent to the terms of a[n] offer, unlike common law, where the acceptance must be the "mirror image." The UCC allows additional terms.
????-6-

At issue here are the terms Sam first added to his offer guaranteeing installation within 15 days. Windco's acknowledgment of order altered this term guaranteeing installation "within 60 days." As between merchants any additional term will become part of the contract unless the contract limits it to its own terms, there is an objection within 10 days, or the term materially alters the contract.
Here, while Sam wanted installation within 15 days, the question arises if this qualifies as a time is of the essence condition. Because Sam did not object upon receiving Windco's acceptance with additional terms, it likely will be held that this is not a material term. And this term will become part of the contract.
Shipping cost language will not be a material term as "shipping costs are customarily borne by the buyer."
Warranty disclaimers are valid if conspicuous and use the term merchantability.
Therefore, unless a court finds the installation date guaranty to be a material term, all of these terms will become part of the contract.
Consideration
Consideration is a legally sufficient, bargained-for exchange.
Here, there appear to be no consideration issues as Sam is to pay money, Windco is to provide window frames which neither were legally obligated to do.
Defenses-Statute of Frauds (SOF)
Under the statute of frauds certain contracts must be evidenced by a writing to be enforceable. Contracts for goods of $500 or more fall under the statute of frauds.
Such contracts can be taken out of the statute of frauds by performance. Facts here state "Windco installed the windo[ws]." Therefore, this contract can be taken out of the SOF.
In any case, because there are documents authenticated by both parties (mail order form by Sam & acknowledgment of order by Windco) that are writings sufficient to bring the contract within the statute of frauds.
Therefore, the statute of frauds will no[t] prevent this contract from being enforceable.
Unconscionability
Unconscionability arises if there can be shown both procedural and substantive unconsc ionabili ty.
Here, Windco's form stated "contract of sale subject to terms herein." Sam may attempt to claim this is substantively unconscionable, however to be procedurally
???-7-

unconscionable a party must show a lack of bargaining power. Nothing in the facts indicates that Sam could not have purchased window frames elsewhere. Further, to be substantively unconscionable the term must be one-sided. On these facts there is no indication Windco was greatly or significantly in a position to make such a windfall.
Therefore, unconscionability will fail as a defense. There is a valid enforceable contract.
Terms and Conditions
As shown above Windco performed by installing the windows. This condition precedent was fulfilled. It therefore falls upon Sam to meet his obligation or be in breach.
Breach
When one does not fulfill their obligation under a contract or excuse a condition they are in breach.
Here, Sam's refusal to pay the $200 shipping fee is a breach. As noted above, this term became part of the contract because as shown by the usage in trade such a cost is "borne by the buyer." Sam must pay the $200.
At issue here is the disclaimer of warranty discussed above. Often disclaimers of warranty can be material. However, as shown above, this disclaimer met the requirement of "bold & conspicuous" type and expressly mentioned "merchantability and fitness."
Therefore, Sam will have no claim under either warranty or merchantability claim or a warranty of fitness for a particular purpose. In fact, Sam did not indicate a particular purpose at time of contracting so as to become a basis of the bargain.
Remedies
As discussed above, Windco will receive the full contract price plus the $200 shipping fee.
However, if Sam can demonstrate that the late installation did cause the "several delay-related expenses" th[at] he claims this will be considered a minor breach (usually timely performance is not a major breach and, as shown above, this contract does not qualify as a "time is of the essence" contract).
Therefore, Sam will be able to offset the delay-related costs against the contract price, thus reducing his payment by that amount, because Windco will be found to have substantially performed. The court abhors a waste and will reduce Sam's debt by the difference between what the building now is worth and what it would have been worth if the contract was fulfilled as expected.
???-8-

Question 2
As Dan walked down a busy city street one afternoon, Vic, a scruffy, long-haired young man, approached him. For some time, Dan had been plagued by a pathological fear that long-haired transients were trying to kill him. Mistakenly believing that his life was about to be taken, Dan pulled out a handgun and fired the gun, intending only to wound Vic in the legs to prevent the anticipated attack. Rather than inflicting the intended leg wound, the bullet ricocheted off the sidewalk and hit Vic in the heart, killing him instantly.
1. With what crime or crimes should Dan be charged? Discuss. 2. What defense or defenses might Dan assert? Discuss.
-11-

AGGRAVATED ASSAULT
Answer A to Question 2 STATE V. DAN (D)
???Assault is either a substantial step toward an intended battery or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of imminent bodily harm. Modernly, an aggravated assault is an assault committed with a deadly weapon.
Here, the facts indicate that D shot at Vic (V), intending to wound him. If V was apprehensive of being shot, D will be guilty of assault. Additionally, because D shot at V with a deadly weapon, a gun, D will modernly be guilty of aggravated assault.
D will be guilty of aggravated assault. However, the assault will merge with the subsequent homicide.
AGGRAVATED BATTERY
Battery is the unlawful application of force to the person of another. Modernly, a battery is aggravated if it is committed with a deadly weapon.
Here, D intended to wound V by shooting V in the leg. However, the bullet actually killed V by striking him elsewhere. Under the doctrine of transferred intent, D will be guilty of the battery because the intended harm was criminal, and there is great similarity between the intended harm and the harm that actually occurred. Furthermore, because D used a gun to batter V, D will be guilty of aggravated battery.
D will be guilty of aggravated battery, though it will merge with the subsequent homicide.
HOMICIDE OF V
HOMICIDE is the killing of a human being by another human being. Here, the facts indicate that D killed V by shooting at V with a gun. There is a homicide.
CAUSATION - ACTUAL CAUSE
But for D shooting at V, V would not have died.
CAUSATION - PROXIMATE CAUSE
It is foreseeable that shooting to someone with intent to injure could result in a death.
????MURDER
?-12-

Murder is an unlawful homicide committed with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought may be proven under any of four theories.
1) INTENT TO KILL - Intent requires the conscious desire to cause the criminal result. The facts indicate that D only intended to wound V, not kill V. Thus, D did not have the specific intent to kill.
2) INTENT TO INFLICT SERIOUS BODILY HARM - Here, the facts indicate that D shot at V with the intent to hitting [sic] V in the leg. Shooting someone in the leg is likely to cause serious bodily harm and the facts indicate that D intended to wound V. Under this theory, then, D intended to cause serious bodily harm.
3) DEPRAVED HEART ACT - A depraved heart act is a wanton and reckless disregard for the value of human life. Here, D shot at V in a public place with an intent to wound V in the leg. Shooting someone in the leg present[s] numerous, dangerous risk[s] to his welfare and court[s] normally hold that any act that [is] likely to cause serious harm to others is a depraved heart act if the risk is disregarded.
4) APPLICATION OF THE FELONY MURDER RULE - A killing will be felony if it 1) occurs during the res gestae of a dangerous felony or a felony committed in a dangerous way, 2) is foreseeable, and 3) is independent of the target crime. Here, the State will not bring a charge of felony murder, because the only predicate felonies would merge with the crime. Because of public policy reasons, courts refuse to apply felony murder to felonious assaults and batteries, otherwise, strict liability for first degree murder would result from each killing.
Having found malice under the theories of 2) intent to inflict serious bodily harm, and 3) depraved heart act, the State will proceed as follows.
FIRST DEGREE MURDER
First degree murder is an unlawful homicide committed with premeditation and deliberation and specific intent to kill. Premeditation and deliberation may be proven by application of the felony murder rule, or a killing by poison, bomb, torture, or ambush.
Here, the facts indicate that D lacked the specific intent to kill and the felony murder rule will not apply. The State will not bring a charge of first degree murder.
SECOND DEGREE MURDER
All murder not raised to the first degree shall be second degree murder.
Here, because the State proved malice under two theories, but did not raise the charge to first degree murder, the State will bring a charge of second degree murder. Because the State established malice under 2) intent to inflict serious bodily harm, and 3) depraved heart act, D will be guilty of second degree murder absent a defense.
D will be guilty of second degree murder.
??-13-

VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Voluntary manslaughter is an intentional homicide committed with malice, but with mitigation. Mitigation may be proven by adequate provocation or mistaken justification.
Here, D may try to claim that he was provoked into shooting V. However, the first element of adequate provocation requires that a reasonable person be provoked by the conduct. Here, a reasonable person would not have been provoked by V's approach, so V may not claim provocation. Additionally, D may claim that his defense of self-defense is imperfect and results in a charge of voluntary manslaughter. As discussed infra, D will raise a defense of self-defense, and this defense will be imperfect. A court may apply this rule of mitigation to lessen the offense to voluntary manslaughter.
The State may bring a charge of voluntary manslaughter. D will be guilty of voluntary manslaughter if he succeeds in mitigating his crime by an imperfect self- defense claim.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Involuntary manslaughter is an unintentional homicide that results from 1) application of the misdemeanor manslaughter rule, 2) intent to inflict non-serious bodily harm, 3) criminal negligence.
Here, D will try to mitigate his charge by claiming that the homicide was only involuntary manslaughter. D will claim that he only intended non-serious bodily harm and the killing was accidental. However, court[s] consistently hold that any intent to harm with a deadly weapon infers an intent to inflict serious bodily harm.
Additionally, D may claim that he was only criminally negligent, not reckless. D's claim may work depending on the surrounding situation of the terrain.
The State may charge D with the lesser included offense of involuntary manslaughter.
DEFENSES TO HOMICIDE
SELF-DEFENSE
Self-defense [is] the actual and reasonable apprehensions of bodily harm.
Here, D may claim that he believed V would harm him. However, this belief is not reasonable, because a reasonable person would not have assumed V's approach
????-14-

meant V intended to do harm. Furthermore, D used unreasonable force because V was not threatening any harm.
D's claim of self-defense will fail, but may constitute an imperfect self-defense that mitigates the homicide, as discussed supra.
INSANITY - M'NAUGHTEN RULE
The defendant is entitled to acquittal, if at the time of the crimes and as a result of a mental condition, he 1) did not know the nature or quality of his act, 2) or that his act was wrong.
Under this rule, D may claim that he believed V was going to attack D and kill D. If D subjectively held this belief, then he would have been permitted to defend himself. Even though this believe was unreasonable, in jurisdictions applying the M'Naughten rule, D may not have believed his act was wrong.
D may be able to escape guilt under the M'Naughten rule.
INSANITY - MODEL PENAL CODE
Defendant is entitled to acquittal if at the time of the crime and as a result of a mental condition, he 1) lacked the capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law, or 2) did not know his act was wrong.
Even though D was capable of conforming to the requirements of the law, he may claim that he did not know his act was wrong, because he believed he needed to defend himself. In jurisdictions holding to the MPC insanity position, D would need to prove he did not know his act was wrong.
D may avoid guilt under the MPC test for insanity.
IRRESISTIBLE IMPULSE TEST
Defendant is entitled to acquittal if his crime was the result of an irresistible impulse that overcame his will.
Under this test, D would need to prove he was unable to control himself when he shot V. This test would p robably no t provide a defens e becaus e D could h ave controlled himself, he just thought he needed to defend himself.
D will probably be guilty in jurisdictions applying the irresistible impulse test.
DURHAM RULE
Defendant is entitled to acquittal if his crime was the product of a mental defect.
Here, D's crime appears to be the product of a mental defect. That is, D believed V would kill D because of a delusion.
????-15-

In the minority of jurisdictions that apply the Durham Rule, D may avoid guilt because the crime was the product of mental defect.
WELLS-GORSHEN RULE
Under the Wells-Gorshen rule, insanity defenses that do not give rise to absolute defenses may negate the mens rea requirement of a crime.
Here, D may claim that he lacked the mens rea to commit murder because he thought V was going to do harm to D. However, under the malice theories, the State proved that D intended to harm V. Even though D thought he was acting in self-defense, he still intended this harm.
The Wells-Gorshen rule will not apply here.
DIMINISHED CAPACITY
Here, D may try to argue that his delusions diminished his capacity to form the intent to commit murder. This rule only applies in a small minority of jurisdictions and usually is applicable only to negate the mens rea of a crime. Here, D is not seeking to negate the mens rea.
Diminished capacity will not apply.
??-16-

CHARLES V. DAN
HOMICIDE CHARGES.
Answer B to Question 2
???Murder: Murder is the voluntary taking of the life of another with malice. Malice can be shown by perpetrator's intent to kill, by his being responsible for death during commission of a dangerous felony ("felony murder"), by acting in a manner demonstrating a wanton disregard for human life, or by intending to inflict serious injury.
Here, Dan is on a busy street and is approached by someone he imagines intends to hurt him. Dan is carrying a concealed weapon, a gun, with which he shoots in Vic's direction intending, he says, "only to wound him," but a ricochet bullet kills Vic.
-There is clearly a homicide and Dan is clearly the cause. But for Dan's firing, voluntarily, the gun, Vic would not be dead.
-Intent: First degree murder is a specific intent crime, usually shown by evidence of premeditation and deliberation, or by felony murder. Felony murder is not likely to apply here. Though crimes of carrying [a] concealed weapon and criminal assault might be felonies, the shooting did not occur in furtherance of these crimes. So, premeditation and deliberation are the focus [sic]. A case can be made that Dan premeditated this crime by the fact that he was carrying a concealed gun. Moreover, deliberation can occur in a very short time; even a moment's deliberation can be enough to sustain the charges. Here Dan thought about his act long enough to consider Vic's "scruffy" appearance to be a threat to him, and to decide to shoot.
Second Degree Murder
Intent to inflict serious bodily harm satisfies the malice requirement. Vic shot "to wound Vic in the legs." A bullet to the legs is surely serious bodily harm, so Vic can be found to have malice on this basis.
Likewise, Vic's shooting a gun on a "busy street" is likely "wanton disregard for human life" so that Vic's malice can be shown to be based upon "depraved heart."
Finally, the killing of a person by "dangerous means" as a lethal weapon, here, a gun, is sufficient to establish intent.
Conclusion
Prosecutor can charge Dan with first degree murder based upon his intent, shown by carrying and firing [a] gun on [a] busy street and his premeditation. Second degree murder included.
???Assault and Battery
?-17-

Criminal assault merges into battery where the threat which constitutes assault occurs simultaneously with the harmful touching required for battery.
Criminal battery is the harmful or offensive touching of another without consent. The touching may be indirect so long as a physical touching occurs and the object which touches was set in motion by the perpetrator. Here Dan clearly caused the bullet to "touch" Vic in harmful manner.
Conclusion
Vic can be charged with criminal assault and battery. N.B. Legal statutes may result in a gun charge v. Dan. Defenses For Dan
Justification
A justification excuses the crime and results in "no crime." Here, Dan will argue self- defense as justification. Self-defense excuses a killing if the perpetrator acted reasonably (general intent) and in good faith (specific and general intent crimes) to protect self from serious bodily injury or death and if the actions in defense were proportionate to the threat.
Here, Dan will argue he only acted to save himself from Vic, whom he believed intended to kill him, and that deadly force was proportionate and justified.
However, since Vic made no threatening gestures toward Dan and there are facts suggesting Vic was brandishing a weapon, a reasonable person in Dan's position would not have concluded his life was in jeopardy. So Dan's excuse falls in the majority. His "good faith" alone is irrelevant to second degree murder, a general intent crime. In a minority of jurisdictions, if his mistake is found to be in "honest" or in "good faith," the crime may be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter.
Conclusion
Self-defense is not likely available to Dan.
Excuses:
Dan will defend saying he did not have the requisite intent for murder.
He will say he only intended to wound Vic. However, as discussed above, both the specific intent for first degree murder and general intent for second degree are supported by his acts. His intent to do serious bodily harm by wounding Vic with a bullet, the use of a gun, [and] the thinking he did before firing all support Vic's having requisite intent for murder, arguably first degree.
?????-18-

Insanity
In majority the defense of insanity is established if, at the time of the offense, the perpetrator was suffering from a serious mental defect or disease such that he lacked substantial capacity either to appreciate the wrongfulness of his act or to conform his behavior to the requirements of the law (A.L.I).
Here, while Dan is described as having a "pathological fear" of long -haired persons, we do not know if he has had an established diagnosis of serious mental illness. If he does have such a defect or disease, Dan will have to show that his delusional state was of the kind that anyone believing as he did would have acted in the manner he did or that his disease caused him to lack substantial capacity to understand that he was shooting someone or that it is a crime to do so.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is the killing of another in a state of passion or high emotional arousal caused by a provocation, more than mere words, that would have aroused such emotion in any reasonable person in that position, and that th ere was no time for the person to "cool off", and that he did not, in fact, cool off.
Here Dan will argue that Vic's coming toward him looking as he did caused Dan to be so afraid that he acted in a state of high emotion.
Conclusion
Dan's arousal is not that which a reasonable person in his situation would experience. Dan's mental illness is not considered in this formulation.
Conclusion
Charges of murder in first degree will lie against Dan, though they may be dropped to second degree murder. Dan's defenses will fail, except possibly the insanity defense, for which we have insufficient information to decide.
????-19-

Question 3
Debbie, a well known photographer, owns a studio that offers "on location" photogra phy, enabling patrons to be photographed in environments of their choice.
Jon owns a new health spa located in a nearby mountain region. Jon had seen and admired Debbie's "on location" photography work. He called Debbie to arrange for photography as part of his promotional plan for the spa. Jon told her that he planned to trim 50 pounds from his own considerably hefty frame by participating in the program of diet, exercise and strength training offered at the spa. He wanted to have "before and after" pictures taken of himself eating at the spa, working out on the spa exercise equipment and hiking along one of the spa's scenic trails. The photographs were to be displayed in strategic locations throughout the spa and would be included in the spa's brochure. Debbie stated that the total charge for the photography (which would consist of five "before" pictures and five "after" pictures) would be $1,000. The parties agreed that the "before" pictures would be taken on the following day.
When Debbie arrived at the spa, she learned for the first time that it was a health spa for nudists. Debbie was extremely uncomfortable, but the naked Jon persuaded her to stay and take the first set of pictures.
On the next day, Jon received the five "before" pictures and a letter from Debbie requesting immediate payment of $500, and stating that the five "after" pictures would be taken by her assistant upon notification that Jon had lost 50 pounds.
Jon consults you and asks the following questions:
1. Does an enforceable contract exist between Debbie and Jon? Discuss.
2. Assuming that an enforceable contract exists, can Jon require Debbie to take the "after" pictures personally? Discuss.
3. Is Debbie entitled to a $500 payment at this time? Discuss.
-21-

Contracts
Answer A to Question 3
?This is a contract primarily for services and will be analyzed using common law principles. Debbie is a photographer and contract is for services - taking the photographs (not for the photos themselves) for common law. UCC rules discussed when they apply only. (Uniform Commercial Code).
I. Don v. Debbie - Enforceable Contract? A. Formation
1. Mutual Assent
a. Offer must contain subject matter, definite terms, and intention to be bound. Here, Jon called Debbie and discussed the 10 photos and their purpose, the terms, and expressed intention to be bound. Offer is valid.
b. Acceptance. Must be a mirror image agreement to the offer and express the intention to be bound. Here, Debbie accepts Jon's offer, and both agree to the specific terms.
c. Consideration. Is a bargained fo r exchange of legal detriment. Here, Debbie agrees to take pictures in exchange for Jon's payment of money. Consideration is adequate.
II. Defenses
A. Statute of Frauds - (SOF) valuable and easily misunderstood contracts must be in writing.
1) UCC $500 Rule - In order for the contract to be enforceable, it must be in writing if the value of the goods is more than $500 (valuable). Here, under UCC, a writing is necessary. But because this contract is primarily a services contract, it would be enforceable without a writing.
a. One year rule - Both UCC and Non-UCC. If a contract, at time at formation, cannot be performed within one year, a writing is necessaryforthecontracttobeenforceable. Here,(hopefully) Jon can lose 50# in less than one year, and this rule does not apply. The contract is valid without a written contract.
b. Impossibility/Impracticability
If there are intervening events that occur which are unforeseeable, the performance is excused (leg. [sic] illegality destruction of subject matter, death/incapacity of the parties).
??????-22-

Here, Debbie became uncomfortable when she found out that Jon's spa was a nudist camp. She would try to assert that being uncomfortable once was enough; the second time was impossible for her.
c. Mistake
When Debbie did not know that Jon's spa was a nudist camp, Jon did not tell her that it was a nudist camp, and neither party knew (at formation) that Debbie was not comfortable in the nudist camp, there was a mutual mistake. The contract is voidable by either party.
Unilateral mistake - If Jon could argue that Debbie should ha ve known or asked about certain circumstances that precluded her work, he can prevail on this issue.
If Debbie can show that Jon should have told her that his spa was a nudist camp, Debbie would prevail. The mistake is chargeable to the more unreasonable party.
d. Detrimental Reliance - Promissory Estoppel
Partial performance - Jon would argue that there was a partial performance by Debbie and that he relied reasonably and detrimentally that Debbie would finish the job.
e. Modification
At common law, modification requires additional consideration. At UCC, only good faith is necessary. Consideration substitutes can be used, e.g. detrimental reliance, supra. Here, Debbie wishes to modify contract from $1,000 for 10 photos to $500 for 5 photos. She can prevail at common law if she can show additional consideration, or, at UCC, good faith. But Jon has no consideration. This modification is not valid.
III. Can Jon require Debbie to take "after" pictures?
A. Delegation of Duty - Courts favor assignment and delegation. The delegation must be with the consent of the obligee or must not be to his detriment. Here, if Jon does not want to give consent for delegation of duty to Debbie's assistant, he must show that there is diminution in value of the services.
????????-23-

B. Personal Services - Contracts are not assignable. If Jon can assert that Debbie's services were so personal that her duties cannot be delegated, he would prevail. Debbie would argue that photography is not like a portrait and that an equally qualified photographer (such as her assistant) could perform just as well. However, courts are reluctant to enforce specific performance on personal service contracts. Damages would likely be in expectation damages.
IV. Is Debbie entitled to a $500 payment at this time?
A. Express v. Constructive Conditions
All express conditions must be completely performed to avoid breach. Constructive conditions must be substantially performed to avoid breach. Here, the question would be whether there was an express (v. constructive) condition that the total job would need to be completed before payment in order to avoid breach. The courts won't likely construe this to mean the entire contract.
B. Divisible Contract?
If Debbie can successfully argue that the contract consisted of 2 parts (before and after) she would be entitled to partial payment for partial performance. This is not a divisible contract and Jon would prevail.
C. Modification valid?
No, for inadequate consideration, supra.
D. Quasi - Contract Recovery
In order to avoid unjust enrichment the court considers recovery in Quasi-Contracts. Traditionally, only the non-breaching party could recover. In modern law, the breaching party could also recover if the breach were not willful and in good faith. Here, Debbie would be able to recover $500 for value of the before photographs, because her breach was in good faith.
V. Damages under UCC
1. Seller's breach - When seller breaches, the buyer is entitled to market price minus contract price. Alternatively, buyer can "cover."
A buyer is entitled to seek replacement from another buyer and sue the seller for the difference.
?-24-

Answer B to Question 3
Enforceable Contract Between Debbie and Jon? Since this is not a contract for goods common law will be the authority. 1. Contract?
A contract is a promise or set of promises the performance of which the law recognizes as a duty and the breach of which the law will provide a remedy [sic]. It consists of mutual assent and [is] supported by consideration.
2. Was There an Offer by Debbie?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the offeree such that a reasonable person would conclude that a bargain had been formed. Under common law an offer must include: parties, subject matter, price, and time and quantity. Here the parties are implied because she is "stating" this to Jon.
The quantity is stated as "5 before pic[ture]s and 5 after" pictures. The price is "$1,000 dollars and the time is the next day". Therefore there is a valid offer here.
3. Acceptance?
An acceptance is an affirmative assent communicated to the offeror in the manner requested, if not requested then in a reasonable manner. An acceptance to a bilateral offer may be by return promise or by performance.
Here there is an acceptance because "the parties agreed" that the before pictures would be taken the following day. Therefore Jon assented to the onset of Debbie's performance.
4. Consideration?
Is a bargained-for exchange that causes legal detriment. Here there is consideration because Debbie is promising to take photographs (using her professional skills and time) and Jon is promising to pay Debbie $1,000.
5. Statute of Frauds?
The statute requires that certain contracts be reduced to writing to be enforceable. One of these is for goods $500 and over. Although this seems like a contract for Debbie's services as a photographer, she is also producing tangible moveable goods. The goods were not moveable at the time the contract was formed, however, and therefore the statute would not apply. Therefore a contract exists and
??????-26-

it is enforceable.
Contract?
Jon v. Debbie
??Assuming a contract exists, supra, what are the rights Jon may assert?
Was there an enforceable delegation from Debbie to assistant?
The law favors delegations. A delegation occurs when one party delegates his duties under an existing contract to a third party.
Here there is a delegation because Debbie says "the after pictures would be taken by the assistant."
Is the delegation binding on the assistant? A delegation is binding on the delegatee only if they knowingly consent; usually consideration is involved. There are no facts stating whether the assistant consented. One could reasonably assume she was being compensated and consideration would exist.
Debbie would remain liable for performance as the delegator. Are there exceptions to an enforceable delegation? Exceptions -
1. Prohibited by contract;
2. Prohibited by statute;
3. Too personal in nature.
Here there may be a valid exception because it could be argued that the artistry of a "well known photographer" is too personal in nature to delegate.
Therefore Debbie would not be able to delegate her services. Can Jon demand that Debbie take the pictures?
Where specific performance would require one to personally perform it will not be enforced based on a prohibition on involuntary servitude.
Therefore Debbie would not be forced to perform. She may, however, be enjoined from performing elsewhere during that time.
Her discomfort may be a factor to rebut based on impracticability. Debbie v. Jon
If Debbie doesn't perform is she entitled to partial compensation?
?-27-

If Debbie's "extreme discomfort" can be shown to make performance impracticable she may be entitled to services already rendered.
Impracticability exists where a reasonably unforeseeable intervening event, the risk of which was not assumed by either party, makes performance extremely difficult; the duties of the parties may be discharged. Here may be reasonably unforeseeable because "it was a nudist camp and Debbie didn't find out about it until that day. There is no indication she assumed this risk. In order to be successful, she would have to [show] that it would be very difficult to perform the contract. Since "Jon persuaded her to stay" the first time, it may be difficult.
She may be able to recover quantum meruit for the services already provided.
She may argue that there was a divisible contract and recover under this theory. "Jon received the 5 before pictures" and Debbie's demand for payment. There is nothing in the contract telling us there is a separate delivery for a separate payment.
-28-

Question 4
A zoo maintenance employee threw a pile of used cleaning rags into a hot, enclosed room on the zoo's premises. The rags contained a flammable cleaning fluid that later spontaneously burst into flames as a result of the heat in the room.
The fire caused a large water main in the zoo to burst, and the escaping water from the main washed away a portion of the zoo's zebra pen fence. A zebra escaped from the zoo through the hole in the fence caused by the water.
A young child encountered the zebra in a nearby residential area. The child petted the zebra and offered it a stick of candy. In taking the candy from the child the zebra bit off one of the child's fingers.
On what theory or theories of liability might an action be brought against the zoo on behalf of the child and what should be the likely outcome of such action? Discuss.
-29-

I. Child vs. Zoo
Answer A to Question 4
?Strict Liability. For the child to recover against zoo in strict liability she must simply show that the wild animal causing her injury was owned by or under the care of the zoo and that she suffered injury that were [sic] of the type consistent with foreseeable harm by the wild animal. This is because owners/caretakers of wild animals are strictly liable for the reasonable and foreseeable harm caused by the wild animal.
Here, the zebra was clearly under the care/control of the zoo when it escaped from its cage. As such, zoo would be strictly liable for any reasonable/foreseeable harm the animal causes.
Zoo will argue that the child assumed the risk when it petted the zebra and offered itastickofcandy. However,giventhefactthatthezebraisgenerallyconsidered to be a wild animal, and that it is foreseeable that it could bite if in close proximity to a person, this would not relieve zoo's liability.
II. Child vs. Zoo
Negligence. For child to recover against zoo in negligence, she must show duty, breach of that duty, causation, and damages.
[Note: Zoo's liability would be based on various liability under the theory of respondeat superior as the zoo's employer (Maintenance Man), and the performance of his duty, set into motion the series of events that resulted in child's injury.]
Duty. Dutyariseswhenthereisalegallyrecognizedrelationshipbetweenplaintiff and defendant that results in defendant having to act is [sic] some fashion other than arbitrarily towards plaintiff. The duty owed is one of reasonable care towards all foreseeable plaintiffs in the zone of danger created by defendant's negligence.
At common law, duty was largely based on one's status in relationship to defendant. One could be an invitee, a licensee, or a trespasser. Here the child plaintiff was not on defendant's property at the time of the accident, but rather was in a residential area "nearby" the zoo. As zoo is in the business of housing, caring for, and maintaining wild animals, it should be reasonably foreseeable that an accident could arise that would result in an animal being left loose in the nearby community, and because of the nature of a wild animal's behavior, harm could have resulted to a person in the nearby community. This is particularly true where children are around.
BreachofDuty. Breachofdutyariseswhendefendant'sactionsdonotrisetothe standard of care required by the law. Here, Learned Hand's approach would note that the zoo breached its duty if the cost incurred with avoiding the harm causing incident was less than the product of the probability of the harm causing incident
?????-30-

arising and the magnitude of loss should the harm causing event occur.
Here, a fire caused a large water main to break with the ensuing rush of water washing away a portion of the zebra's pen fence. When considering a pen fence, (as opposed to a sturdy cage), it's entirely foreseeable that a sudden deluge of water could wash away a portion of the "fence." As such, the zoo should have ensured construction of a caged facility that would be sturdy enough to withstand this type of accident.
The cost involved with the construction of a pen of this nature would be significantly less than the potential danger that a wild animal could cause to men, women, and children in a nearby area should that animal escape. As such, it could be argued that the zoo breached its duty.
Causation. For liability to arise, the zoo (or in this case, the zoo's employee) would have to be both actual and primary cause of the child's injury.
Actual Cause. Actual cause arises when "but for" defendant's actions, plaintiff would not have been injured. Here, the zoo's maintenance employee threw a pile of cleaning rags saturated with a flammable cleaning fluid into a hot, enclosed room. The mainten ance man should ha ve known that there was the potential for the rags igniting resulting in a fire. When this happened, the fire set into motion a series of events that resulted in the zebra getting free and the child being bitten. As such, "but for" the maintenance man's action, the child's injury would not have occurred.
Proximate Cause. Arises when a result is the natur[al] and probable/reasonable and foreseeable consequences of defendant's actions. Here, we look to see if the injury is of the type reasonably expected, or was significantly more severe than reasonably expected. Here, there was a fire, that resulted in a water main bursting, that resulted in a fence being washed away, that led to a zebra escaping, that resulted in a child being bitten by the zebra. The zoo could reasonably argue that the type of injury resulting to the child was not of the type that would be the foreseeable natural consequence of a fire that caused a water main to break. As such, they could avoid liability as the maintenance man's actions would not be the proximate cause of the child's injury.
Defenses. Atcommonlaw,contributingnegligencewasacompletebartorecovery. Here, the zoo could argue that the child was contributorily negligent when she petted the zebra and fed it candy. If the court argued, child would be barred from recovery.
Comparative Fault. Today, most jurisdictions have adopted comparative fault. Here, the could [sic] would weight [sic] the percentage of responsibility on each of the parties and assess damages accordingly. If child was less at fault than zoo, she could recover accordingly.
Assumption of Risk. If it can be shown that the child knew the consequences of her actions and knowingly embraced the danger, this could bar her from recovery. This would be a matter of fact for the court to decide.
????-31-

Child v. Zoo Strict Liability
Answer B to Question 4
??Owners of trespassing wild animals will be held strictly liable (no fault need be shown) for damages proximately caused by the animals.
Zebra a Wild Animal?
A wild animal is one that is not domesticated (does not serve man). A zebra is a wild animal because its only use is to be displayed in a zoo. This zebra is from a zoo and thus is considered wild.
Causation.
The damage to the child was both actually (BUT-FOR TEST) and proximately (LEGALLY) caused by the zebra because the zebra bit off the child's fingers [sic]. But for this biting, the child would not have lost his fingers [sic]. There are no superseding causes.
Damages.
The child lost his fingers [sic].
Defense.
Because contributory negligence is not a defense to strict liability, the only question is whether Child assumed the risk.
ASSUMPTION OF RISK requires plaintiff to understand the nature and extent of the risk and to disregard that risk. Here there is no evidence that Child apprehended a risk when approaching the Zebra. Indeed, Child's offer of candy was a friendly gesture that showed Child probably was comfortable and had no idea that his fingers were in danger.
Therefore Child did not assume the risk of injury.
Domestic Animal?
Zoo could try to claim that, like a horse, a Zebra is a domestic animal, and as such, Zoo would not be strictly liable unless the zebra had known dangerous tendencies. However, this claim should be dismissed because a zebra only looks like a horse; they [sic] are not, however, domesticated.
Under the facts Child should be able to recover from Zoo in Strict Liability. Negligence?
??????-33-

Negligence is conduct that falls below the standard of care set by law to protect others from unreasonable risk of harm.
Here Child may also assert a claim in negligence if he can show that Zoo breached an owed duty to him, actually and proximately causing Child's damages.
Vicarious Liability
Under the doctrine of RESPONDEAT SUPERIOR Zoo will be liable for torts committed by its employees if they act within the scope of their duties.
Here the maintenance employee was doing his duties, cleaning up, when he threw the rag into the hot room. Zoo will be liable for any tort arising from this act if it is tortious.
Duty.
Zoo owes a duty to act as a reasonable zoo. In addition, as possessor of land, they owe a duty not to harm others outside their land by activities on the land.
Breach.
Under Cardozo from the Palsgraf decision a duty is owed to all foreseeable plaintiffs, generally within the zone of the activity. Here it is foreseeable that an escaped Zebra would run into civilians and so Zoo was under a duty to be very careful this wouldn't happen.
Here Zoo breached this duty in possibly several ways.
1. First, Child could argue that Zoo's employee was negligent in not realizing that a rag soaked with a flammable liquid could spontaneously combust in a hot enclosed room. This, however, is a poor argument because most maintenance men do not have that understanding of physics and chemistry.
2. Second, Child could claim that Zoo did not build a strong enough fence to keep the zebras penned in. This is not so strong either because the force from the broken water main probably exceeded any natural force that could reasonably be foreseen. But if the fence was not strong for normal wear and tear Child could show breach here.
3. A third argument, much better, is that Zoo has a duty to notice when wild animals escape and has ready plans to round them up or tranquilize them if they do escape. Here it seems Zoo did nothing while the zebra ran away.
Therefore Zoo has breached its duty to control its animals.
Causation.
Zoo might claim that the Child's offer of candy was superseding cause that breaks
????-34-

the chain of proximate causation. However, Child would have to be doing something independent and unforeseeable for Zoo to prevail. While carrying candy is not a response to an escaped zebra, it is not unforeseeable that a child should have candy, nor is it unforeseeable that such a child might offer it to the zebra.
Damages.
Discussed supra.
Defenses.
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE is conduct by the plaintiff that fails to conform to the standard of care set by law for the plaintiff's own protection.
Here a CHILD STANDARD OF CARE applies. Child will be expected to act as a reasonable child of similar age, experience, and education will act in similar circumstances.
Here Child's behavior is typical of a "young child" and is therefore not negligent. ASSUMPTION OF RISK fails for the similar reason as discussed supra. Therefore Child could also recover for his damages under Negligence theory.
??-35-


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2003
California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2003 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2003 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Contracts 1 Criminal Law 11 Torts 19 Contracts 31
???i

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?ii

Question 1
Ted is the President of Chip Co, a small company that makes computer chips for the secondary personal computer market. In the regular course of Chip Co's business Ted did the following:
Ted sent an e-mail to his daughter Pam, a Vice President of Chip Co, which stated: "This is to confirm our conversation of the other day wherein you agreed to make your home garage available next week to Chip Co for storage of Chip Co items. You will be paid $5.00 per year." Pam e-mailed back, stating, "That's right, Dad; the garage is clean and ready for storage."
Ted also sent an e-mail to Dave, a customer of Chip Co, which stated, "We agree to replace our defective chip in your computer, but only if you agree not to bring any legal action against Chip Co." Dave sent a return e-mail stating that he agreed to these terms.
Ted telephoned Bob, another customer of Chip Co, to confirm that Chip Co will send 100 computer chip units to Bob, who had already fully paid for the units, but only if Bob agreed to pay an additional 10% due to an increase in Chip Co's operating costs. Bob reluctantly agreed, as he needed the chips immediately.
Ted wrote a letter to Silicon Inc., in which Chip Co offered to buy 10 tons of processed silicon during the coming year, at market price, should Chip Co need any silicon. Silicon Inc. responded, agreeing to sell all the silicon to Chip Co that it might want.
Is there adequate consideration for Chip Co's agreements above-described with Pam, Dave, Bob and Silicon, Inc.? Discuss.
1

PAM v. TED
Governing Law
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
??The governing law in this case is the common law, because the transaction involves a lease of land.
Was there a Contract?
A valid contract consists of a valid offer, acceptance, bargained-for consideration for which the law recognizes a duty and provides a remedy for breach.
Here, there appears to be an offer, because Ted sent an e-mail to Pam to confirm the terms of there [sic] offer. Pam's response, "That's right," appears to be an acceptance of the terms of the e-mail and confirmation of the offer. Further, the confirmation contained sufficient definite terms to clearly state the terms of the agreement.
Therefore, a valid contract exists.
Consideration
Valid consideration consists of a bargained-for exchange between the parties. It consist[sic] of a legal detriment to the promisee (Pam), which is bargain for by the promisor (Ted). Generally, the court will not inquiry [sic] where the consideration appears to be minimal (nominal) or clearly one-sided. Further, consideration can consist of monetary value of forbearance of doing something that one has the legal right to do.
Here, although the facts don't state the size of the garage, the consideration of $5.00 appears to be minimal or nominal given the average size of a garage. Despite this, $5.00 per year is very minimal and questions as to the adequacy of consideration paid. However, Ted could argue the fact that Chip Co ("Chip") is a small company and part of the bargained-for exchange was Pam's interest in the success of Chip.
Therefore, adequate consideration can be found.
Defenses
The statute of frauds ("SOF") requires that a contract for an interest in land, including leases, be in w[r]iting. Further, any contract for which performance is impossible within one year is required to be in witting[sic].
Here, Pam could argue that there was not a witting[sic] that was signed by Ted, the party to be charged. Ted would argue that the e-mail was sent via the company e-mail and constitute[s] a sufficient witting[sic] to document the agreement and had sufficient terms to indicate the agreement. Because the e-mail contains an ability to verify that the e-mail was sent and provides evidence of the terms of the agreement, the court is likely to find
2
???
that the e-mail was a sufficient witting[sic] to comply with the witting[sic] requirement of the SOF.
Therefore, this defense would not work.
DAVE v. TED Governing law
Here, the UCC is the governing law, as the transaction involves the sale of goods.
Merchants
A merchant is a person who deals in the type of goods involved in the transaction or holds themselves out as having special knowledge in the goods. Here, Ted is clearly a merchant, as he deals in the type of goods involved (chips).
Contract
See definition above.
Here, an offer was clearly made because the e-mail sent by Ted to Dave indicated Ted's willingness to enter into an agreement. Such offer was clearly accepted by Dave via Dave's e-mail back to Ted.
Therefore, a contract was formed.
Consideration
See definition above.
Here, Ted is bargaining for Dave's agreement to not "bring any legal action". The courts will not normally inquire as to the adequacy of such agreement absent Ted's knowledge that the claim was false. If the claim was false and Ted or Dave knew the claims was [sic] false, then such agreement to not bring any legal action would not be bargained for or represent legal detriment. Although the facts don't state that the claim was valid, if it is found that the claim was valid, then adequate consideration was provided. However, see preexisting duty below.
Therefore, the court will find adequate consideration if the claim is valid and was bargained for in exchange for not bringing any legal action.
Preexisting Duty
A preexisting duty is a duty for which one is already legal[sic] required to do. Under the common law, any modification requires consideration. If no consideration is found, the court would likely find that such modification was not bargained for. However, the UCC allows modification without consideration, as long as the modification was made in good faith.
3
??????
Here, Dave would argue that Ted was under a preexisting duty to replace the defective chips, because this a[sic] warranty issue. However, the facts don't indicate that Ted had given a warranty for the chips. Further, if such warranty had been disclaimed, not[sic] duty to fix the chips would exists[sic]. Absent these facts, there does not appear to be any requirement for Ted to fix the chips.
Therefore, since the facts don't indicate that a warranty existed, Ted and Dave's agreement would appear to be a valid bargain-for exchange.
BOB v. TED Governing Law
UCC would govern (see above).
Merchant
See above. It appears that Bob is a merchant as well, because Bob is a customer and presumably the chips would be utilized in a product, especially given that the average consumer doesn't usually purchase 100 computer chips for personal use.
Contract
See definition above.
Here, Ted telephoned to confirm what appears to already have been an agreement to send 100 chips. This is supported by the fact that Bob had fully paid.
Modification
As discussed above, merchants can modify an agreement absent consideration as long as 1) the parties agree and 2) the modification was made in good faith.
Here, Ted's communication to Bob appeared to be a refusal to ship unless Bob agreed to the price increase. Although the facts state that Bob reluctantly agreed, the facts don't appear to indicate that the price increase was made in bad faith, because the facts show that the market price had increased. Bob would argue that this was in bad faith, because an increase in the market price was why Bob had entered into the agreement to protect from price. Bob could have rejected the increase and sued for damages, but didn't.
Therefore, absent any evidence of bad faith on the part of Ted, valid consideration was obtained.
State of Frauds ("SOF")
Sale of goods greater than $500 are required to be in witting[sic]. This includes modifications.
Here, Ted telephone[sic] Bob and modified the agreement, which Bob accepted. The facts 4
??????
don't support that a writing was obtained. As such, Bob could argue that the agreement was not valid because the modification was required to be in witting[sic] given that it involved the sale of goods. However, the facts don't state the price and is[si c] would ha ve to be shown that the 10% increase was greater than $500.
Therefore, if the modification was greater than $500, the[sic] Bob would be successful in claiming the SOF.
SILICON INC. ("Silicon") v. TED Governing Law
UCC is the governing law.
Merchant
See above. Silicon appears to be a merchant as well, because they deal in the goods involved.
Offer and Acceptance
See definition above.
Here, there is an offer made by Ted, which appears to have been accepted by Silicon.
Consideration
See definition above. If a promise doesn't really bind someone to perform, but states that such party can perform if they want, then such promise is considered to be illusory.
Here, because Silicon's response Ted's[sic] offer to purcha se 10 tons of silicon stated that they agreed to sell all the silicon to Chip Co that it might want appears to be illusory because it really doesn't bind Chip to purchase all of their requirements form[sic] Silicon. Ted's offer clearly manifests an intent to purchased[sic] 10 tons of silicon, at market price, should Chip need any silicon. Because Ted could but[sic] the silicon should it need to, it didn't bind Chip to purchase such amount.
Therefore, no valid bargained-for consideration was given.
Promissory estoppel
Promissory estoppel will supply consideration up to the point to prevent an injustice if the promisor (Ted) should have known or knew that Silicon would rely on Ted's promise and did actually justifiably rely on Ted's promise.
Here, the facts don't support that Silicon relied on Ted's promise (i.e., hire additional workers). All the facts state is Silicon's response to sell the silicon.
Therefore, absent any eviden ce of det rimenta l reliance , promiss ory estopp el will not a pply. 5
??????
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
Is there adequate consideration to support the ChipCo - Pam agreement?
6

This agreement contemplates the rendering of a service (storage) and will therefore be governed by the general principals[sic] of contract law.
Here, the parties have exchanged promises. Pam has agreed to provide her garage for use as a storage facility. Since Pam was under no obligation to provide has[sic] garage to ChipCo before the agreement was made, her promise is adequate consideration to support the agreement.
ChipCo has promised to pay Pam %[sic]5.00 dollars a year in exchange for the use of her garage. ChipCo was formally under no obligation to pay Pam $5. so this would appear to also be good consideration for the promise.
In this case, the dollar amount of the payment in[sic] nominal. Generally, the court will not weight[sic] the economic advantages of the consideration, so long as it was fairly bargained for. However, where the consideration is of such little value and where it appears that the consideration was merely recited, the court may find the consideration inadequate.
Here, parties appear to have merely recited a sham consideration in order to make the appearance for a bargained-for exchange as opposed to a gratuitous offer.
If Pam wished to avoid the obligation she could proceed under two theories. First, assuming that the $5. was never in fact paid, she could assert failure of consideration. Second, she could argue that the consideration was nominal and not truly bargained for.
The fact that she and Ted (acting as an agent for ChipCo) are closely related tends to show that the offer was gratuitous in nature. However, storage space seems to be an odd gift to give, which would support the contention that the agreement was for a strictly business purpose.
Conclusion
If Pam wishes to avoid obligation she would probably prevail by pleading that the $5. was merely a recitation of sham consideration and that therefore her promise is unsupported and not binding.
Consideration for the ChipCo - Dave agreement
The subject matter of this agreement is a good; defined as anything mov[e]able at the time of identification to the contract, including crops and timber to be severed from the land and the unborn young of animals. A computer is a good.
The repair of goods is a service and not covered by the UCC. This transaction, however, arises from the sale of the computer. As the original seller of the good, ChipCo remains liable to the buyer for its defective product. Therefore, the contract which this agreement
7

flowed from is to be analysed in light of the UCC.
Relinquishment of a right as consideration
Not doing something which one has a legal right to do before the agreement is consideration. Here, Dave gave up the right to bring a legal action against ChipCo. The facts tell us that the product sold to Dave contained a defect. While we do not have any express warranty to look at, all goods sold by merchant sellers come with an implied warranty of merchantability.
In this case, the computer contained a defect. T he implied warranty would cover a properly working computer, fit for its intended purpose. Since the computer was not fit for its intended purpose, Dave had a cause of action against ChipCo for breach of the implied warranty of merchantability. Relinquishment of that right is valuable consideration.
Preexisting duty
On the other hand, ChipCo was under an already existing duty to repair the computer or to respond with money damages in a breach of contract action. Some courts have found that relinquishing the right to respond in breach is consideration; no facts here would make a good argument for that. The efficiency of responding with money damages rather than repairing or replacing the product is not evident. Furthermore, the UCC favors the out-of- court resolution which would be for ChipCo to repair its product.
Therefore, ChipCo promise[sic] to repair the chip will not be found to provide adequate consideration as ChipCo was under a preexisting duty to do so.
Good faith modification under the UCC
While at common law, any agreement to modify an existing contracts[sic] had to be supported by new consideration; the UCC allows a modification without new consideration, if made in good faith.
Here, the good faith of ChipCo is questionable. ChipCo seems to have strong-armed a valuable right from Dave, in exchange for only doing what they were obligated to do anyway.
It is unlikely that a reviewing court would find this modification agreement in good faith, even in the face of Dave's agreement to it. Therefore, the agreement will be unenforceable.
Is there adequate consideration for the Bob - ChipCo agreement?
In this case we have bilateral executory contract, fully performed on Bob's side. His 8

contract obligations have been fully discharged by his payment. Furthermore, his agreement to pay, and then paying, for computer chip units is good consideration, as he was obligated to buy them beforehand.
Addition ally, ChipCo's agreement to sell the chips is good consideration for the agreement. At issue here, again, is the subsequent modification of the existing enforceable contract.
Good Faith
As discussed above, the UCC allows a good faith modification of a contract without new consideration. However, both parties must agree to the change in terms.
Here, we have ChipCo making a demand for more money. Bob was under no obligation to agree to pay the additional money. The resolution of this question will therefore turn on Bob's response. Had he made an unqualified agreement, and had ChipCo made the demand in good faith, then the modification would be enforceable.
However, we are told that Bob "reluctantly agreed" because he needed the chips immediately. This would tend to show that Bob did not intend to modify the contract but only intended to receive the benefit of his original bargain.
Therefore, Bob can assert a lack of good faith in modification and it will not be enforceable against him.
Is there adequate consideration for ChipCo's agreement with Silicon?
In this case we have what appears to be an illusory promise. ChipCo has offered to buy silicon "should" it need any and Silicon has agreed to sell all the silicon ChipCo "might want". At first blush, ChipCo does not appear to be obligated to any greater extent than it was before the promise was made.
Requirements Contracts
Under the UCC, as well as at common law (Wood v. Lucy), business contracts such as this have implied good faith or best efforts. Requirements contracts are not illusory because the law regards them as being for "as required in good faith".
Here, ChipCo is not obligated to buy anything from Ted. However, if ChipCo comes to require silicone, a very likely event, it will be obligated to buy from Ted.
Therefore, there is sufficient consideration to support ChipCo's promise with the addition of the good faith term.
9

Question 2
Bill and his wife, Alice, fought constantly. On occasion Alice had to miss work when Bill physically beat her up during quarrels. Alice is Chuck's supervisor at Acme Bank. Chuck would like to take over Alice's job at the bank. Knowing of Bill's violent temper, Chuck devised a scheme that he hoped would induce Bill to murder Alice, so that Chuck would be promoted to Alice's position at the bank.
One evening, Chuck followed Bill to his favorite bar. When Bill had become very drunk, 10

Chuck told him that Alice was having an affair with the bank president and that Chuck had found them locked in an embrace in the president's office that very afternoon. Chuck's story was completely fabricated. As Chuck expected, Bill became furious and ran out of the bar in a rage, shouting, "This time I'm going to kill her."
On the way home, Bill, who was still obviously drunk and in a state of severe agitation, stopped at a sporting goods store and bought a shotgun. The store owner, Dave, sold him the gun, even though Bill stated to Dave that he was going to use it to kill his wife. Bill rushed to his house with the gun, looked through a window, and saw Alice sitting at the dining room table playing cards with a neighbor, Emily. He stood outside the window and took aim at Alice. Meanwhile, Emily's husband Fred was coming to pick up his wife. Fred saw Bill and tackled him, hoping to disarm Bill before he fired the gun. Unfortunately, Bill pulled the trigger just as he was tackled by Fred, and the deflected shot hit and killed Emily.
With what crime or crimes, if any, should Chuck, Bill, Dave and Fred be charged and what, if any, defenses should each assert? Discuss.
11

I. Crimes of Chuck
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
Solicitation? Solicitation occurs if one person asks another to commit a crime with the intent that the crime be committed. Here, Chuck did not ask Bill to kill Alice, but merely set it up so he would be likely to. Thus, although there was intent that the crime be committed, Chuck did not ask. He just told a lie to Bill. Thus, no solicitation.
Accomplice? One is liable as the accomplice to the crime of another if he encourages or assists in committing it with the intent to promote or facilitate commission of the crime. Here, Chuck intended that Bill kill Alice because he wanted Alice's job at the bank. He assisted in the commission of the crime because it was his lie that enraged Bill to begin with, and he obviously intended Bill to do just what he did. Thus, Chuck can be convicted of all the crimes of Bill as an accomplice that were committed after he told the lie to Bill.
II. Crimes of Bill
1. Battery? Criminal battery is the unlawful application of force to the person of another that results in physical harm or an offensive touching. Here, Bill unlawfully applied force to Alice because he "physically beat" her during quarrels. Such beatings would certainly consist of offensive touching, but probably physical harm as well. Thus, Bill can be charged with battery.
2. Assault? Criminal assault comes in at least two varieties: an attempted battery or intentionally placing another in apprehension of an imminent battery. Here, the facts show only that Bill and Alice fought constantly and that Bill beat her during quarrels. Although it could reasonable[sic] be implied that Alice experienced apprehension of an imminent battery or that Bill occasionally missed in an attempted battery, assault would merge with battery anyway. Thus, assault will merge with battery.
3. Murder of Emily? Murder is the unlawful killing of another human being with malice. Malice can be established in any one of four circumstances: intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily harm, willful and wanton conduct (depraved heart), and the felony murder rule. Here, the[sic] Bill intended to kill Alice because he "took aim at Alice" while he was standing outside pointing a shotgun at her.
Under the doctrine of transferred intent, the intent to kill one person can be transferred to another person if the other person is the one who winds up getting killed. Here, Fred tried to stop Bill from shooting into the window but was too late to keep Bill from firing the gun. Unfortunately, he wound up shooting and killing Emily, his wife.
Furthermore, under the deadly weapon doctrine intent to kill can be inferred from the use of a deadly weapon, such as the loaded shotgun in this case. Here, the intent to kill can
12
?????
be inferred because Bill used a shotgun to kill Emily. However, that intent can be rebutted as discussed below.
However, further analysis is necessary because murder can be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter under adequate provocation (heat of passion). Such mitigation requires that the defendant be sufficiently provoked to become enraged, that a reasonable person would also have become enraged, the person did not cool off, and a reasonable person would not have cooled off. Sufficient legal provocation includes finding your spouse engaged in intimate relations with another person. Here, although there might initially be sufficient provocation when Chuck told the made-up story about Alice and the bank president having an affair (he yelled "This time I'm going to kill her!" and he was in a rage), when Bill got to his house all he saw was Alice and Emily playing cards at the table. A reasonable person may have not become so enraged as this just from hearing about it. However, if a reasonable person would have been enraged and wouldn't have cooled off, the murder of Emily might be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter. Here, a reasonable person would not have become so enraged.
If not, and the intoxication (discussed below) negates intent to kill, there are sufficient facts to show willful and wanton conduct because shooting a shotgun at another person clearly shows such disregard for the value of human life and a very high degree of risk of at the least seriously bodily harm. Voluntary intoxication cannot negate a general intent crime such as depraved heart murder.
Thus, Bill can be charged with the murder of Emily.
4. Attempted murder of Alice? Attempt is the specific intent to commit a crime and legally sufficient substantial step in furtherance of that intent that goes beyond mere preparation. Here, Bill appears to have the requisite intent to kill because he shouted that he was going to kill Alice. The act required must be a substantial step, which is either close proximity to committing the crime, an unequivocal act that suggests the criminal intent, or is strongly corrobor ative of the criminal purpose. Here, Bill took the requisite substantial step because under any test his act of pointing the gun at Alice and killing her was only stopped by Fred tackling him. Thus, Bill would be charged with the attempted murder of Alice, unless there is a defense.
Bill's intoxication? Bill may argue that he did not have the requisite intent because he had become "very drunk". Intoxication can be defense to criminal conduct if it negates a required mental state. If Bill was so drunk that he could not form the requisite intent, then he cannot be charged with intent. Such intoxication must be so severe that it is no different than insanity, which, under the majority rule would require that Bill be unable to distinguish the nature or quality of his acts, or if he could, he did not know they were wrong. Here, that defense will probably fail because of the history Bill had with Alice and how readily he got mad.
Thus, Bill's intoxication will be no defense to attempted murder. 13
??
III. Crimes of Dave
1. Accomplice liability? Accomplice defined above. Here, Dave may have the requisite intent that the crime be committed (murder of Alice) because Bill told Dave that he was going to use the shotgun to kill Alice and Dave sold the shotgun to him anyway. Under this circumstance, Dave will have assisted in the killing of Alice sufficient for him also to be convicted of murder.
IV. Crimes of Fred
Battery of Bill? Battery defined above. Although Fred's tackling of Bill resulted in the death of his wife Emily, Fred was attempting to prevent Bill from shooting. Defense of others is a valid defense if one reasonably believes that another person is in imminent danger of an unlawful attack and uses reasonable force to prevent it. Here, Fred had a reasonable belief someone was under an unlawful attack because he saw Bill pointing the shotgun at someone through the window. Tackling Bill would be reasonable force because he saw that Bill was about to shoot. Thus, Fred will not be charged with the battery of Bill.
There are no facts to suggest that Fred has committed any other crimes.
??14

State v. Chuck
(1) Solicitation
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
?Solicitation occurs when the defendant (1) encourages, invites, or in some way requests another to commit a crime, (2) with the specific intent for that person to commit that crime. Here, Chuck followed Bill to a bar and told him that his wife Alice was "having an affair with the bank president..." Since Chuck "hoped [he could] induce Bill to murder Alice", he was requesting that Bill commit a crime. Since Chuck wanted Bill to murder Alice, he intended that the crime be committed. Chuck can be charged with solicitation. It s[h]hould be noted that, if according to the doctrine of accomplice liability, discussed next, Dave is charged with a substantive crime, the solicitation will merge with that crime.
(2) Accomplice liability for murder of Emily, attempted murder of Alice
An accomplice is one who assist[sic] another in the commission of a crime. In that sense, any actions which are foreseeable consequences of that crime will cause liability to attach to the accomplice. Here, Dave intended that Bill murder Alice; so, when Bill attempted to murder her (discussed infra), Dave became liable. Similarly, because it was foreseeable that Bill might murder the wrong person, attachment for murder would also occur. For whatever Bill can be charged with in connection with his attempt to murder Alice, so can Dave.
State v. Bill
(1) Murder of Emily
Murder is the (1) unlawful (2) killing of a (3) human being by (4) another human being with (5) malice aforethought. Here, Emily was killed when Bill shot her by mistake. Because there was no legal basis for this shooting, it was unlawful. Because Emily was a person who died, there was a killing of a human being. Because Bill did the killing, it was performed by another human being. Was there malice aforethought? The word aforethought just means that the mens rea (culpable mental state) was formed prior to the murder, which it was because Bill "took aim" before he killed.
Malice?
Malice occurs in four varieties: (1) intent to kill, (2) intent to inflict serious injury, (3) reckless disregard for the value of human life (depraved heart), and (4) the felony murder rule.
15
???
Intent to kill or seriously injure?
Intent to kill can be inferred through the lethal weapon doctrine, in which the defendant uses a deadly weapon such as a gun in a manner it was intended. Here, Bill bought a shotgun just prior to using it, further indicating intent to kill. Finally, at the bar, he affirmed his intent to kill when he shouted, "This time I'm going to kill her."
Reckless disregard for human life (depraved heart)?
This version of malice is present whenever the defendant knows of a substantial risk of lethal danger to others and willfully disregards that risk and proceeds with his risky behavior nevertheless. Here, by pointing a loaded shotgun at a house with people inside, Bill demonstrated such a depraved heart.
Bill has acted with malice and can be charged with murder. Defenses?
Bill may claim adequate provocation and heat of passion, which would be a mitigation defense leading to voluntary manslaughter.
Voluntary manslaughter?
Voluntary manslaughter occurs when the defendant (1) intentionally kills another under the (2) heat of passion arising out of (3) an adequate provocation, from which (4) neither he nor the reasonable person would have been able to withstand or (5) cool off from within the time period of his actions. In fact, the law does recognize the sudden knowledge that one's spouse is having an affair as adequate provocation. In addition, here, Bill took immediate action on that knowledge and killed as soon as he could buy a gun and get back to his house. Whether during this period a reasonable person would have cooled off is a jury call.
Voluntary intoxification?
Bill may argue that he wasn't in full control of his reasoning because he was drunk, and that he killed because of that fact, among others.
However, the law doesn't recognize this defense. Voluntary intoxification is mainly a defense to a specific intent where it negates the element of premeditation and deliberation; however, for common law murder, which is a malice crime, voluntary intoxification is not a defense.
(2) 1st degree murder of Emily
1st degree murder is that murder which is committed with premeditation and deliberation.
16
????????
Premeditation requires that the defendant ponder his actions ahead of time, and deliberation requires that he analyze his actions to be sure he wants to proceed. Here, Bill bought a shotgun, which he immediately used to kill Emily with[sic]. This indicates purpose of action (he was thinking specifically about what he was going to do). He also aimed the gun at a person, which further indicates purpose and thought. Arguably, Bill has acted with premeditation and deliberation.
Defenses?
Voluntary intoxification?
This has been discussed supra. Voluntary intoxification may be a viable defense here because it can negate the specific intent required for this crime. Arguably, Bill's defense may prevail.
Mistake of fact?
Bill may also argue that his specific intent was not to kill Emily, but rather Alice; however, the doctrine of transferred intent (where the result was not what was intended, but is applicableanyway)willapplyherebecausetheelementsofBill'scrimeareallpresent,and the law doesn't require that the person be the person intended to be killed.
(3) Attempted murder of Alice
An attempt crime occurs (1) when the defendant is unsuccessful in the commission of his specifically intended crime, but (2) where he has taken enough steps toward that conclusion to quality[sic] as proximate.
Specific intent?
Bill bought the shotgun "to use it to kill his wife"; therefore, he had the specific intent to kill, which is the required intent for attempted murder.
Proximity?
The last act test can be used to determine proximity if the defendant has accomplished all but the last act needed to complete his crime. Here, but for Fred's intervention, Bill would surely have murdered Alice; therefore, he has satisfied the proximity element.
State v. Dave
(1) Accomplice liability for murder, attempted murder
Dave may be liable for this if he in some manner assisted in Bill's crime by selling him the shotgun. However, even where a defendant knows that criminal activity may occur, there
17
??????
is no liability where that defendant has no stake in the criminal activities. Since there's no indication that Dave charged Bill any more than the usual price for the gun, he probably didn't have a stake in Bill's actions. Since Dave's knowledge was not bolstered by any other staking-creating behavior on his part, he will probably not be held liable for Bill's actions.
State v. Fred
(1) Battery
Battery is the voluntary and intentional touching of another person in either a harmful or offensive manner. Here, Fred tackled Bill as he (Bill) was taking aim to fire his gun; therefore, the touching was probably offensive at the least, and even harmful if Bill was injured. However, Fred has a defense.
Defense of Others
Where one fears an unlawful, imminent and harmful battery on another, that person is privileged to use whatever reasonable force is necessary to protect the interests of the other person. Since Fred saw Bill pointing his gun at a window, he probably knew that Bill was preparing to shoot, and he acted in such defense of others. Fred's defense will prevail.
???18

Question 3
Flora owns a busy florist shop on a major thoroughfare near a dangerous intersection. The intersection has been the site of recent accidents, some involving cars exiting Flora's parking lot. Because of this situation she hired Attendant to direct traffic into and out of the parking lot and placed a sign at the lot's entrance, visible from the street, which states: "Caution, Cars Entering Street." Flora also instructed Attendant to make sure that the street was clear before sending a car out, but she provided no other instruc tions or training. She was aware that Attendant was sometimes careless in his work. Attendant, given the clothes he wears, could not be mistaken for a police officer.
One morning, distracted by the line of honking cars that wished to exit the lot, Attendant waved Customer's car out of the parking lot with only a hurried glance to determine if the street was clear. Customer heeded Attendant's signal to exit the lot, but was distracted by her crying baby in the back seat and did not check to see if the street was clear. Businessman, who was driving toward Flora's shop, was dialing his cellular phone, and did not see Customer's car exiting the lot.
Businessman, whose driver's license had expired, collided with Customer. Both drivers were injured and both cars were damaged.
It is a crime to drive with an expired driver's license. It is also a crime to employ a parking attendant who does not possess a special parking attendant license which costs $50, and requires three hours of safety training relating to operating a parking lot. Any employer of a parking attendant must obtain the license on behalf of the employee and is responsible for ensuring that the employee attends the three hours of safety training. Flora did neither.
On what theory or theories might an action or actions for damages be brought, and what defenses might be anticipated by:
1. Customer against Businessman? Discuss.
2. Customer against Flora? Discuss.
3. Businessman against Flora? Discuss.
4. Customer and Businessman against Attendant? Discuss.
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
19

I. Customer (C) v. Businessman (B)
Customer will bring an action against Businessman under a negligence theory.
Negligence requires a Breach of a Duty that Causes Damages.
A. Duty
B had a duty to drive as a reasonable driver with reasonable care to all for[e]seeable plaintiffs.
B. Breach - Negligence Per Se
B was driving with an expired license in violation of a criminal statue. Violation of statute can establish breach only if the statute was established to protect this class of plaintiff from this class of harm. Breach cannot be proven here using negligence per se. Renewing a license really does nothing with respect to making people safer drivers.
Breach - Established
B was dialing on his cell phone and did not see C. It is careless to dial on a cell phone and not watch where you are going. B breached his duty to drive with reasonable care.
C. Causation
Actual - It is unclear if B could have stopped in time or avoided the accident had he been paying attention. It can probably be proven that but-for his carelessness the accident would not have happened.
Proximate - It is for[e]seeable that failing to pay attention to the road will result in a collision.
D. Damages
C suffered personal injury and property damage.
E. Defenses
1. Comparative Negligence - Pure
In a majority of jurisdictions, C will only be able to recover damages in (inverse) proportion to her fault. If the accident was partly C's fault (as facts imply) she will be responsible for her share of her own damages.
2. Comparative Negligence - Partial
20
???????????
In some jurisdictions, C may recover in (inverse) proportion to fault, but she will be totally barred from any recovery if her fault is 50% or greater.
3. Contributory Negligence
In a minority of jurisdictions, if C negligence at all contributed to the accident, she will be totally barred from recovery. C didn't check to see if the road was clear. This could bar her recovery. She was not driving with sufficient reasonable care.
4. Contributory Negligence Exception - Last Clear Chance (LCC)
In jurisdictions following contributory negligence with the LCC doctrine B will not be able to use the defense of contributory negligence if B had the last clear chance to avoid the accident.
B will have had the last clear chance if he knew or should have known of the danger, could have prevented it, but did not.
Although C was negligent, B should have seen her coming out, and if that would have enabled him to avoid the collision, the defense fails.
F. C liable to B for personal in jury and property da mage, minus ap portionment through comparative negligence.
G. Contribution: by F to B.
II. Customer(C) v. Flora (F)
Customer will bring a claim against Flora for negligence.
Status of Parties
C is a business invitee of F's since C was on the premises for the business/financial benefit of F in the standard routine of business.
Negligence Defined Supra. Duty
Because C was a business invitee on F's premises, F owed her the highest duty to inspect reasonably for dangers, warn, and make safe. F had a duty to make bad traffic conditions safer.
21
??????
Respondeat Superior
Flora also has the vicarious liability/duty of all her employees engaged in normal business activities. As such, she is responsible for the actions of Attendant (A).
Breach - Negligence Per Se
F violated the criminal statute requiring that anyone employing a parking attendant must ensure the parking attendant is licensed and trained. This can establish negligence per se if the purpose of the statute was to protect people like C from accidents like this. Since the training involved safety, it certainly applies here.
Breach established by negligence per se.
Breach - Established Actual
F had a duty to C to warn/find of known dangers and make them safe. Using a parking attendant would help this duty. However, Attendant was careless and F knew he was sometimes careless. F is responsible for his actions. Since A failed to warn/make safe and even worsened the situation by giving C assurance, F is definitely in breach.
Actual breach (in addition to neg. per se) established (although only 1 needed). Causation
1. But for attendant's failure to be careful, no accident.
2. For[e]seeably carelessness by Attendant causes an accident.
Damages
Supra.
Defenses
Supra (same as B), except contributory/comparative not available in some jurisdictions for Business invitee, even though C didn't check.
Additional Defenses
F may claim that (A) was frolic[k]ing outside scope of duties and/or that criminal statute not made to prevent this harm.
??????Both will fail.
22

F liable for Personal Injury and Property Damage. G. Contribution: By B to F.
III. BUSINESSMAN AGAINST FLORA
A. Negligence
Supra.
B. Duty
B was a for[e]seeable plaintiff of F's negligence but was not an invitee because he was not yet on the premises. As such, F owed him a duty only to be a reasonable shopkeeper.
C. Breach - Negligence Per Se
Supra.
B is included in people statute aimed to protect.
D. Breach - Actual
It will be hard to prove F owed B a duty, since he wasn't on premises. However, A waving of C was actively negligent and F liable.
E. Causation
But for Flora's negligence in training (A) and his subsequent actions for which she was liable, no accident.
For[e]seeably, A's failure to guide cars properly will cause accident with 3rd party. F. Damages
B suffered personal injury and property damage.
G. Defenses
Because B was not an invitee of F, the defenses of contributory negligence and comparative negligence will hold because F owed him no special duty, and B significantly contributed to his damages by failing to watch the road.
F liable to B for damages through vicarious liability of active negligence of A or through breach by negligence per se, but damages limited by B's contribution, depending on
23
?????????
jurisdiction.
IV. C and B v. A
C and B will bring a COA against A for negligence.
Negligence
Supra.
Duty
To act as an ordinary attendant with reasonable care.
Breach
Attendant was "careless" and waved customer on with "only a hurried glance." Causation
Actual - But for carelessly waving customer, no accident.
Proximate - For[e]seeably, waving customer carelessly results in accident. Damages
Personal Injury and Property Damage for B and C.
Defenses
Contributory Negligence
Supra.
LCC Doctrine
Supra.
Comparative Negligence Pure
Supra.
Comparative Negligence Partial
Supra.
24
?????????
Attendant will be partially liable for damages in jurisdictions with pure comparative negligence, and may be liable in jurisdictions with partial comparative negligence, depending on how fault is assigned.
Contribution
From C to A for damages to B. From B to A for damages to C.
?25

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3 I. CUSTOMER v. BUSINESSMAN
A. NEGLIGENCE A negligence action will arise when one party has acted with an unreasonable amount of risk causing harm to another party where a duty is owed to avoid that risk. Here, Businessman and Customer have a traffic accident in which both drivers are injured and Customer is bringing an action for damages against Businessman.
1. DUTY. Duty is avoiding an unreasonable risk of harm to another person. Generall y, duty is owed any time the party acts, called malfeasance. In cases of nonfeasance, that is,afailuretoact,dutyisonlyowedunderspecialcircumstances. HereBusinessmanwas driving down the street toward the flower shop. As a driver, Businessman has a duty to drive reasonably to avoid the risk of harm to others on the street.
2. STANDARD OF CARE
a. GENERAL STANDARD OF CARE. Generally, the standard of care ascribed to the duty owed is that of a reasonably prudent person in the same or similar circumstances. Here, Businessman would be expected to maintain a standard of care to the other drivers, that is, in line with the actions of any reasonably prudent driver driving toward the flower shop. Since Flora has erected a sign visible to drivers asking for extra caution in this area, the circumstances would demand that any reasonably prudent driver in this area would take extra care to avoid harm to others.
b. STANDARD OF CARE BASED UPON A CRIMINAL STATUTE.
Sometimes, if there is an applicable criminal statute, the standard of care mandated by that statute may be used to define the standard of care required under negligence. Here, there is a statute that requires a drive[r] to have a valid license. Businessman's license has expired. He has violated the statute. However, when the statute merely applies to licensing and the collection of funds, it will generally not be used to define the standard of care under negligence. Here Businessman's expired license will not be used to define his standard of care when driving his car.
3. BREACH OF DUTY.
a. GENERAL BREACH OF DUTY. A breach of duty exists when the avoidance of harm is less than the probability of harm and the probable severity of that harm (The Hand theory). Here, Businessman is driving in an area known as a dangerous intersection. The intersection has been the site of recent accidents and there is a sign asking for extra caution. It would be very easy for Businessman to heed the sign, put down his cellular phone, and take a little extra time and care in respect for the intersection. Weighing the ease with which Businessman could pay more attention against the probability of an accident (it is a dangerous intersection) and the possible severity of harm (auto accidents are always costly in both personal and property damage), shows that Businessman has
26
????
breached his duty.
b. BREACH OF DUTY BASED ON A STATUTE--NEGLIGENCE PER SE. If there is an applicable criminal statute which may be used to define the standard of care, and that statute defines both the type of harm that has been caused and the harm has been caused to the class of people the statute was designed to protect, then the statute may be used to define the breach of duty. Here, Businessman has an expired license. The statute will not be applicable for negligence per se. See above.
4. CAUSE IN FACT. The harm that the plaintiff suffers must result directly from the action of the defendant, or the defendant's action must have been a substantial factor in causing that harm. Here, Business[sic] collided with Customer. He has actually caused her harm.
5. PROXIMATE CAUSE. The harm caused must also occur without any foreseeable superceding or intervening events which have broken the chain of events from the defendant's actions to the plaintiff's harm. Here Businessman runs into Custom er. There are no superceding or intervening events. Businessman's act is the proximate as well as actual cause of Customer's harm.
6. DAMAGES. To recover in negligence, there must be actual damages. Here, both Customer and Businessman were injured. There were actual damages.
7. DEFENSES. Defenses available to the defendant include assumption of risk, comparative negligence, and contributory negligence (minority of jurisdictions).
a. ASSUMPTION OF RISK. If the plaintiff knows of the risk and has voluntarily decided to continue with his own actions taking that knowledge into consideration, he is saidtohaveassumedtheriskofhisownactivity. Here,Customerhaschosentodriveher car; however, there is no indic[a]tion that she has assumed any special risk for that ordinary task. She certainly has not assumed the risk of being hit by Businessman at this particular time. Customer has not assumed the risk.
b. COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE. If the plaintiff is also acting negligently is[sic] his actions, he may be liable for part of his own damages. Total liability to the defendant will NOT be relieved. However, plaintiff may be responsible for a proportionate amount of his own damages with respect to his own level of liability. Here, Customer was distracted by her baby in the back seat. Her distraction indicates that she may have been neglecting to pay proper attention to her own driving and under the circumstances may also be considered negligent.
c. CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE. In some jurisdictions, negligence of the plaintiff will relieve the defendant of all liability. If this is a Contributory negligence jurisdiction, defendant will escape liability based on Customer's own liability.
27
????
II. CUSTOMER v. FLORA
A. NEGLIGENCE
1. DUTY. See above.
2. STANDARD OF CARE. See above. Here, Flora is a shop owner and knows that
the traffic leaving her property is at greater risk for injury than normal. She has taken certain steps to alleviate the situation, such as posting a sign and hiring an attendant.
a. STATUTORY STANDARD OF CARE. See above. Here, the applicable statute requires an employer to have a special license and for the attendant to get special training. Flora has neglected to do either. She has not met the requisite standard of care as defined by the statute.
b. RESPONDEAT SUPERIOR. As an employer, Flora is responsible for the actions of her employees in conjunction with the job they perform. Flora is aware that Attendant is sometime careless in his work, which is also less than the standard of care that an ordinarily prudent employer would take in same or similar circumstances.
3. BREACH OF DUTY.
a. NEGLIGENCE PER SE. See above. Here, the class of people protected by the statute would be the drivers the trained attendant would be expected to help or protect. The type of harm addressed by the statute would be the harm resulting from auto accidents. Thus, here the statute is applicable to both the class of people harmed and the type of harm addressed. The statute could be used to establish a breach of duty by Flora since Flora has violated the statute.
4. CAUSE IN FACT. See above. The fact that Flora did not hire a properly trained attendant was a substantial factor in the harm caused to Customer. Attendant was not doing his job properly and waved Customer's car into oncoming traffic. Flora as the employer is responsible for attendant. Customer's harm is a cause in fact of Flora's actions of hiring an untrained attendant.
5. PROXIMATE CAUSE. See above. There were no intervening/superceding events and all were foreseeable.
6. DAMAGES. See above.
7. DEFENSES. See above. Flora will argue that Customer was also negligent.
28
?
III. BUSINESSMAN v. FLORA
A. NEGLIGENCE
1. DUTY. See above.
2. STANDARD OF CARE. See above.
3. BREACH OF DUTY. See above.
4. CAUSE IN FACT. Since the Attendant sent Customer out into the traffic in front of
Businessman, and this caused Businessman to run into Customer, Flora's liability would be the same as her liability for Customer.
5. PROXIMATE CAUSE. See above.
6. DAMAGES. See above.
7. DEFENSES. Flora will argue that Businessman was also negligent.
IV. CUSTOMER & BUSINESSMAN v. ATTENDANT
A. NEGLIGENCE
1. DUTY. See above. Attendant has a duty to perform his job to avoid an unreasonable risk of harm to Businessman and Customer.
2. STANDARD OF CARE. Attendant's standard of care will be that of a trained attendant as defined by the statute, though it is not Attendant's responsibility to obtain that training. He will be expected to perform as a reasonably prudent parking attendant under same or similar circumstances.
3. BREACH OF DUTY. See above. Attendant was distracted by the honking horns and subsequently did not pay adequate attention to sending Customer's car into traffic. The utility of paying attention is small compared to the possible harm from wrecks. Here, Attendant himself had breached his duty of care to be a reasonably prudent attendant.
4. CAUSE IN FACT. See above. Had attendant not sent Customer into traffic, she would not have been hit by Businessman.
5. PROXIMATE CAUSE. See above.
6. DAMAGES. See above.
7. DEFENSES. Attendant will argue that both Customer and Business[sic] were
negligent in their actions.
??29

Question 4
Seller sent Buyer a form letter stating that Seller was "offering for sale a full line of zinc bolts, in 1,000 bolt lot s, delivery within 30 da ys." The letter con cluded by stating, "Responses must be received within ten days." Attached to the letter was a purchase order form. The front of the purchase order form contained the prices of various bolts followed by blank spaces in which the purchaser could enter the desired quantity of bolts. The back of the purchase order form included the following statement: "Any action for breach of warranty under this contract must be commenced within one year after the cause of action has accrued."
30

Upon receipt of Seller's letter, Buyer immediately copied the description and price of one type of bolt from Seller's form onto the front of Buyer's own purchase order form, specified a quantity of 1,000 bolts, and sent the form to Seller, who received it three days later. On the back of Buyer's form was the following statement: "This order is subject to the terms and conditions below." Paragraph 4 of said form provided in part: "The parties agree that the four-year limitations period provided in Uniform Commercial Code 2-725(1) shall be applicable."
Section 2-725(1) of the Uniform Commercial Code states: "An action for breach of any contract for sale must be commenced within four years after the cause of action has accrued. By original agreement the parties may reduce the period of limitation to not less than one year but may not extend it."
The price of zinc rose dramatically in the two weeks following Seller's receipt of Buyer's form. Seller then sent a telegram to Buyer stating: "Because of market conditions we cannot fill your order." Buyer responded with a demand for delivery.
1. If Seller fails to deliver the bolts, will it be liable for breach of contract? Discuss.
2. If Seller does deliver the bolts and they are defective, what is the applicable limitations period for Buyer to file an action for breach of warranty under the contract? Discuss.
31

ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
BUYER v. SELLER
Under Contract Law, the rights and remedies of the parties depend on whether there was a valid contract. Every valid contract must contain an Offer, Acceptance, Consideration, Legal Purpose, and Legal Capacity between the Parties. A contract is a promise or set of promises, the performance which the law will enforce and the breach for which the law will find a remedy.
ISSUE #1 - WHAT LAW CONTROLS?
Under Contract Law, the UCC controls the sale of goods, moveable property identified at contract formation. Otherwise, the common law controls.
Here, the subject matter is for bolts which are moveable property because they are not fixed, nor services, but can be moved from location to location.
Therefore, the UCC controls.
ISSUE #2 - ARE THE PARTIES MERCHANTS?
Under Contract Law, a MERCHANT is a person who deals in the goods of the contract or one who holds himself out as having knowledge of the contract.
Here, Seller is a merchant because they are a company that "zinc bolts" [sic] and Buyer may be a merchant if he is [sic] routinely buys bolts in the normal operation of his business.
Therefore, both parties may be merchants.
ISSUE #3 - IS THERE A NEED FOR A WRITING?
Under UCC 2-201, a contract for the sale of good s worth $500 or more must be in writing, signed by the parties against whom the contract is to be enforced. But between merchants, a sales confirmation by one listing quanti[t]y will bind both parties if the receiving party does not object within 10 days.
Here, the sale of zinc bolts containing lots of 1,000 may be sufficient for $500 or more and may need to be in writing to be enforceable.
Therefore, there may be a need for a writing.
ISSUE #4 - IS SELLER LIABLE TO BUYER FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT?
Under Contract Law, a breach of contract is a failure to deliver that which is bargained for.
?????32

Under Common Law, the contract must specify the parties, subject matter, price, quan[t]i ty, and time for performance. Under the UCC, The parties and price must be specified, all other essential terms may be determined by UCC gap fillers.
Here, the contract specified quan[t]ity because the "Seller was offering for sale a full line of zinc bolts, in 1,000 bo[l]ts lots" and the time for performance was specified because the contract stated "delivery within 30 days".
However, there was a breach of contract by Seller because he "refused to fill the buyer's order." Seller could demand assurances, which he did when "Buyer responded with a demand for delivery".
Therefore, Seller may be liable to buyer for breach of contract. ISSUE #5 - DEFECTIVE BOLTS
Under the Perfect Tender Rule of the UCC, where the buyer receives defective merchandise, the Buyer can exercise three options:
1. Accept the Whole
2. Reject the Whole
3. Keep any Commercial Unit or Units and reject the rest.
Here,ifSellerdoesdelivertheboltsandtheyaredefective,thebuyercanexerciseanyone of the options stated above. However, under the Buyer's Form, the Buyer must file an action for Breach of Warranty within four years after the defective bolts were received because in a battle of the forms, the last form wins, and Buyer's Form appears to be the last form that was exchanged between the parties.
ISSUE #6 - Was there an effective Acce[p]tance of Seller's Offer?
Under UCC 2-2-6, an acceptance, not otherwise conditioned, may be made in a reasonable manor[sic] including the shipment or promise to ship either conforming or non- conforming goods. But a shipment of non-conforming goods as an express accommodation is not an acceptance.
Furthermore, UCC 2-207 allows an acceptance containing var[y]ing terms to be effective. However, the var[y]ing terms will not be included in the contract if:
1. They expressly limit acceptance and the offoror does not agree to the new terms; or
2. The parties are not both merchants, or if they are merchants,
3. The new terms materially altered the terms of the contract, or if there is no alteration,
4. The offeror expressly and timely objects to the new terms. 33

Here, the Buyer may have materially altered the terms when he changed the form to state that "an action for breach of any contract for sale must be commenced within four years" when the Seller's form stated "Any action for breach of warranty under this contract must becommencedwithinoneyear". Sellerdidnotobjecttothevar[y]ingtermswithin10days because "the price of zinc dramatically rose in the two weeks following Seller's receipt of Buyer's form."
Therefore, Buyer may have an action against Seller for br[e]ach of contract because Seller essentially agreed to the new terms, because Seller did not object to the varying terms within 10 days following receipt of Buyer's form, if the change in action commencem ent did not materially alter the terms of the contract.
34

Buyer v. Seller
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
The rights and remedies of the parties depends on whether a valid contract exists. A contract is a promise or set of promises, the performance of which the law will recognize a duty, and for the breach of which the law will provide a remedy. Every valid contract must have mutual assent (offer and acceptance) as well as consideration with no defenses to contract enforcement.
1. What law governs? The UCC governs contracts involving the sale of goods (moveable property identified to the contract at formation), otherwise the common law will govern.
Here we have an agreement involving the sale of zinc bolts, which is a good, therefore the UCC will govern this contract.
2. Are the parties merchants? A merchant is a person who trades in or otherwise holds himself out as knowledg[e]able about the goods of the contract.
Here we have Seller, who sells a full line of zinc bolts, and a Buyer who purchases zinc bolts. For the purposes of this question, both parties will be considered merchants as both buyer and sellers of bolts would or should be knowledg[e]able about the goods of the contract.
3. Is a writing required? Under the UCC, contracts for the sale of goods worth $500 or more must be in writing in order to be enforced, signed by the par[t]y to be bound. But between merchants a sale confirmation by one, listing quantity, will bind both parties.
Here we have an agreement for the sale/purchase of 1000 bolts. It is assumed this contract would exceed $500 in amount, and therefore a writing will be required. The writing has been satisfied because the Buyer sent the seller back a purchase order form which contained all of the elements of the contract.
4. Mutual Assent (defined above).
Seller's letter to buyer and Offer? - Under the UCC, eve[r]y offer must contain at least parties and quantity in order to be legal. UCC gap fillers will be used to provide any additional needed terms.
Here we have a purported offer that does not contain quantity, and therefore on its face the offer might not seem valid. However, in the acceptance, the offeree defined quantity; therefore this offer is valid.
Buyer's letter to Seller an acceptance to the offer? Under the UCC, acceptance 35

of the offer must occur in the manner conditioned in the offer. Here the Seller concluded the offer by stating the responses must be received within 10 days but it did not specify the Buyer must use their form. Therefore the buyer can accept in any reasonable matter that does not conflict with the offer.
Conflicting Terms? Varying terms are usually included in UCC contracts when both parties are merchants, unless the other party objects to the varying terms within 10 days, or if the changed terms materially alter the contract. When two terms are at odds with each other, the effective is that neither term is included in the contract.
Here we have the Buyer changing the terms of the in[i]tial offer by the Seller. This changed term involved limitations on claims for breach of warranty. Since both parties' forms are at odds with each other, both terms are excluded from the contract and the UCC will supply the missing terms with Gap Fillers. Since the UCC under 2-725(1) defines actions for breach of warranty (contract), that UCC clause will apply to this contract.
4. Adequate Consideration? Consideration is a bargained-for exchange between contracting parties, imposing suffic[i]ent legal detriment. Here consideration is not an issue because Seller agreed to sell and Buyer agrees to buy 1000 bolts for an undetermined amount, of which neither party was previously obligated to do. Therefore adequate consideration exists under this contract.
5. AnticipatoryRepudiation? Ifacontractingpartyindicatestheywillnotperformas promised when the time of performance is due under the contract, the other party can declare an immediate breach of contract, suspend performance, and immediately seek damages.
Here we have the Seller telling the Buyer they will not perform according to the agreement and send the bolts. Since this is clear expression of intent to not perform, the Buyer can immediately suspend performance and sue for breach.
5. Is Seller liable for Breach of contract? In general the general rule for damages under a breach of contract is compensatory damages that will entitle the non-breaching party to receive the expected benefit of the bargain. Punitive damages are rarely allowed (usually only for malic[i]ous breach).
Here if the Seller does not perform and deliver the bolts, they will be liable for a major breach of contract. Buyer will not be entitled to force the Seller into specific performance because zinc bolts are not unique items. Rather the Buyer will be required to purchase the bolts from another supplier and then recover the differences in contract price (receive the expected benefit of the bargain) plus an[y] incidental, additional, and reasonable expenses which the Buyer may incur.
The Buyer could recover consequent[i]al damages (such as lost profits) only if [sic] the damages, at the time of contract formation and foreseeable with some level of certainty.
36

There are not facts which indicate the Buyer would be entitled to lost profits in this situation.
6. Defense of impossibility? A contracting party's obligation under the contract can be dismissed if by no fault of its own, the contract becomes impossible to complete. Here we have Seller claiming the market conditions have changed and therefore they cannot perform accord[i]ng to the agreement. This defense will fail if other sellers of zinc bolts could perform under the contract.
6. If Seller does deliver the bolts and they are defective, what is the applicable limitations period for the Buyer to file an action for breach of warranty under the Contract?
As discussed above, since the original agreement contained conflicting terms, both of the conflicting terms were excluded in the contract and the contract conditions revert back to primary UCC law, or if no law exists which governs the dispute, the applicable industry standard. Here the UCC law governing the sale of bolts says any action for breach of contract must be commenced within 4 years, after the cause of action has accrued. A warranty exists that the bolts are fit for a particular purpose and is an implied condition in the contract (like a contract within a contract) and therefore Buyer must file any action for any breach of implied or express warranty within 4 years of discovering the bolts were defective.
37






??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2003
California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2003 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2003 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Contracts 1 Criminal Law 10 Contracts 20
???Torts
31
-i-

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?-ii-

Question 1
Rita is beginning a new business as a painter. In order to attract clients, she printed hundreds of flyers that said, "Rita can paint your home for $2,000-Call Rita now to accept this offer!" Each flyer also contained contact information for Rita, including her telephone number. Rita placed the flyers in the local grocery store where neighborhood residents would be likely to see them.
Marvin picked up a flyer and decided to call Rita. He owned a very large home in an adjoining town. Marvin knew that $2,000 for painting his home would be a tremendous bargain for him. He telephoned Rita, and when she answered the phone, Marvin said, "I accept your offer to paint my home for $2,000. Please start as soon as possible." Before Rita could say a word, Marvin blurted out his home address and abruptly hung up.
Sue also telephoned Rita and asked about having her garage painted. Rita informed Sue that she would have to come to Sue's home before providing a bid, and the two got together at Sue's home later that day. After looking over the garage and negotiating the particulars of the paint job, Rita told Sue that she would paint the garage for $700. Sue responded that $700 was a "pretty good price," but that she wished Rita would do the job for less and needed to consider her options. The following morning, Sue left a phone message on Rita's answering machine saying that she had decided to accept Rita's offer.
Rita also received a recorded phone message from Mary, another possible new client, stating, "I saw your flyer in the grocery store. If you can paint my house for $2,000, the job is yours." The message provided Mary's address. After Rita drove past Mary's house to look at the prospective job, she decided to paint Mary's house. The next day Rita went to Mary's home, with all the necessary painting supplies, but when she started working on Mary's home, Mary came running outside and told Rita to stop painting the house, as she had found a different painting contractor for the job.
Does Rita have enforceable contracts with either Marvin, Sue, or Mary? Discuss.
-1-

Common Law
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1 Rita v. Marvin
??The common law applies to contracts for services. Rita (hereinafter "R") was offering to paint the houses of others. This is a service. Therefore, the common law would apply to this contract.
Formation
Preliminary negotiations
R is offering to paint the houses of others. In order to promote her business, she has placed flyers at a local grocery store. These flyers purport to be an offer, creating in Marvin, and others, the power of acceptance.
Offer I
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent, which is definite in terms, and is communicated to the offeree.
The flyers contain several essential terms.
Subject matter: Painting of houses
Price: $2,000
Quantity: Would be "one" (house) per person
However, the flyer lacked the other essential terms, such as the identity of the parties and the time of performance.
Marvin will argue that the flyer was sufficiently definite. He will argue that R impliedly agreed to paint his house for the aforementioned price. He will assert that in so doing, she manifested present contractual intent and communicated the offer to him.
However, because the flyer lacked several essential terms, it would probably not be considered a valid offer.
-2-
???
Offer II
Defined supra
After seeing the flyer, Marvin called R. When R answered, he blurted out an acceptance of the "offer" and provided his name and address. These terms would fill in the remaining essential terms, identity of the parties and would include the time of performance.
When Marvin called R, he manifested a present contractual intent, to be bound to the terms of a contract. He also communicated his offer to R.
Therefore, Marvin's phone call would probably be a valid offer.
Acceptance
An acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
Marvin hung up the phone before R was able to answer his offer. Therefore, she was never able to manifest an assent to the terms of his offer.
Therefore, no valid acceptance has probably occurred.
Since there is no valid acceptance, there is probably no enforceable contract between R and Marvin.
RITA v. SUE
Common law
For reasons mentioned supra, this contract will be governed by the common law. Formation
Offer
Defined supra
Again, the flyer would not be considered an offer, but rather an invitation to bid.
Sue (hereinafter "S") called R. S and R met at S's house, where R looked over S's garage and provided S with an estimate in regard to painting the garage. R told S that she would paint S's garage for $700. This means that the terms of the offer would be
Quantity: One
Time of performance: As soon as possible
-3-
??????
Identity of the parties: S and R Price: $700
Subject matter: painting the garage
All the terms requisite for an offer are present. R manifested present contractual intent, indicating that she would be bound by the terms of the contract. R communicated the offer to S.
Therefore, a valid offer probably exists, and it is in the power of S to accept the offer. Acceptance
Defined supra
An offer may be accepted for as long as it is held open. In this case, the offer was oral, made in the presence of S, to her person. Such an off er would terminate if and when R left S without having a definitive acceptance.
S will argue that she accepted the offer, unequivocally, when she left the message on R's answering machine. Such an acceptance is unequivocal.
However, S had stated the price was pretty good, but wished that R would do the job for less. R left without S having provided an assent at that time.
Therefore, because the offer was oral, it had to be accepted while R was with S. R did not impliedly or expressly leave the offer open for any time.
Therefore, because R did not leave the offer open and because S did not accept while R was present, the offer probably terminated upon R's departure. There is probably no valid acceptance. However, S's message would probably operate as a counter offer.
RITA v. MARY
Common law
For reasons discussed supra, the common law would probably apply to this contract. Formation
Offer
Defined supra
Again, the flyer would probably not be an offer, but an invitation to bid.
-4-
?????
Mary called R and left a message on R's machine. The messages [sic] stated that if R would paint Mary's house for $2,000, the job was R's job. This message would probably contain all the essential terms of an offer.
Quantity: One house
Time of performance: Within the reasonable future Identity of the parties: Mary and R
Price: $2,000
Subject matter: The house
All the terms for a common law offer are present. When Mary called R and left a mes sage on the machine, she manifested a desire to be bound to the contract, thus indicated present contractual intent. Because the message was left on the machine, the intent was communicated to R, the offeree.
Additionally, this offer looks toward a return performance, not a return promise. Therefore, a court may construe the contract as a unilateral contract.
Revocation
This occurs when an offeror attempt [sic] to withdraw her offer.
When R started painting, Mary came running out of the house, stating that she had a different contractor. Mary will assert that she effectively revoked her offer before R accepted, since R never accepted by a return promise (see infra).
In order to defeat this attempted revocation, R will assert the detrimental reliance on offer rule.
Detrimental Reliance on offer rule
This rule provides that where the offeror should reasonably foresee that her offer would result in reliance on the part of the offeree, resulting in action or forbearance to act, the offer will be held open for a reasonable time to avoid injustice.
Here, Mary made an offer which she should have reasonably foreseen as to induce action on the part of R. R acted, purchasing the paint and beginning performance. A court will probably hold this offer open for a reasonable time to avoid injustice.
Addition ally, should R's arguments fail, she would be able to assert the unilateral contract rule.
-5-
??
Unilateral contract rule
Where an offeror makes an offer which can be accepted only by full performance, the offer will be held open once performance begins, in order to avoid injustice.
As mentioned supra, the offer looks to a unilateral contract. Therefore, a court will probably see that R began performance, and will thus hold the contract open for a reasonable time to allow R time to complete performance.
Acceptance
Defined supra
R never orally assented to the terms of the offer. However, she appeared at Mary's house and began painting. As mentioned supra, the offer looked to a unilateral contract. Therefore, R's performance of the offer would probably be sufficient grounds upon which to argue an acceptance.
Therefore, since R began performance and since the offer would probably be held open for a reasonable time, a court probably will find a valid contract.
Consideration
This is a bargained for exchange, with each party incurring detriment and receiving a benefit.
R would incur the detriment of painting the house. S would receive the benefit fo a newly painted house. S would incur the detriment of paying. R would receive the benefit of the payment.
A valid contract probably exists between R and Mary.
???-6-

Service Contracts
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
?All 3 potential contracts deal with services and therefore are governed by common law contract theories. A contract requires an offer and acceptance which show mutual assent and consideration.
Marvin and Rita
Offer: An offer is the manifestation of the present intent and ability to enter into a bargain that is communicated to the offeree.
In this case, Marvin will attempt to take advantage of the $2,000 price to paint his large home by claiming that when Rita distributed hundreds of flyers stating "Rita can paint your home for $2,000-call Rita now to accept this offer." It was an offer. An offer must have specific and definite terms. Traditionally, an offer had to have quantity, time of performance, the identity of the parties, the price and the subject matter. Marvin will argue that it was definite enough because the subject matter (house), parties (Marvin & Rita), quantity (1 house) and price were all present. In fact, this would be enough modernly as the courts will construe "reasonable" terms in order to complete the contract. However, unfortunately for Marvin it is well establish[ed] that advertisements are only "invitations to negotiate" and are rarely specific enough to amount to an offer. It is debatable whether hundreds of flyers are simply invitations to negotiate or offers. If the flyer had been placed on Marvin's house then he would have a stronger argument that Rita did in fact intend to be bound by the terms in her flyer. However, Rita placed the flyers at a neighborhood grocery store where neighborhood residents would be likely to see them. Marvin, who lived in the adjoining town was apparently not one of the people that Rita had intended to contract with. Therefore, it cannot be firmly established that there was an offer by Rita.
Acceptance
An acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
In the case of Marvin and Rita, Marvin clearly attempted to accept Rita's offer by saying "I accept your offer to paint my home for $2,000." However, because no offer existed there was no power of acceptance in Marvin as he was not the intended person.
Consideration
Valid consideration would exist in this case. Consideration is a bargained for exchange that is a legal detriment and benefit. In this case, Marvin paying $2,000 and Rita painting the house.
However, because of the lack of a valid offer no contract exists between Marvin and Rita.
-7-
????
Contract between Rita and Sue Preliminary negotiations
When Sue and Rita got together to discuss the particulars and go over Sue's home they were engaged in preliminary negotiations.
Offer
Defined supra
When Rita told Sue she would paint her house for $700 there was a valid offer as she clearly had an intent to be bound. The quantity (1 house) identity of parties (Rita and Sue) price ($700), and subject matter (house) were all accounted for. The time of performance would be a reasonable time.
Acceptance
Defined supra
When Sue told Rita "that is a pretty good price" and she would consider her options a valid acceptance had not yet occurred. However, this was also not a rejection of the offer nor a counter offer by Sue and the power of acceptance was not extinguished. It could be argued that when Sue said "I wish you could do the job for less" this was a rejection. However, rejections must be definite to be effective in either conduct or expressions such as "I reject your offer." This did not occur and therefore the offer was still open until Rita decided to revoke it or it lapsed.
When Sue called Rita's house the next morning a timely and effective acceptance occurred. An offer can be accepted at any time prior to revocation and is effective upon dispatch. Generally, acceptance must take place in the same manner as the offer. In both instances it was oral and therefore a valid acceptance.
Consideration - defined supra
There is valid consideration as Sue is paying $700 and Rita is obligated to paint the house. There is a valid contract.
Defense to formation
Statute of Frauds
If either party wanted to get out of the contract it is arguable that they could argue that paint is a good and therefore falls within the statute of frauds requirement that contracts for goods over $500 must be in waiting. However, this argument is week [sic] because
-8-
???????
painting jobs are predominately a service provided by the painter and the cost of the paint does not compare with the cost of labor.
Rita and Mary Offer
Defined supra
When Mary called Rita and said "if you can paint my house for $2,000 the job is yours" she made a valid offer to Rita although time of performance is also missing here. It is unclear whether this offer was for a bilateral or unilateral contract.
Unilateral Offer and Acceptance
It could be argued that Mary made an offer for a unilateral contract by essentially saying "if you paint my house I will give you $2,000 dollars." This appears to be what Mary was stating. If so, the offer can still be revoked at any time prior to acceptance and in this case acceptance was complete performance. However, modernly courts have held that if a person substantially performs on a unilateral contract that is an acceptance. However, the facts state that Rita "started working" and therefore there is no substantial performance and no acceptance and therefore no contract.
Bilateral Offer and Acceptance
If it is construed that Mary's offer was intended to receive a promise as consideration instead of an act then it was necessary for Rita to accept by conduct or expression. Rita will argue that her conduct of beginning the painting clearly showed that she had accepted the offer and promised to paint the house. Mary will counter that she only wanted a promise to paint the house.
There is valid consideration.
There appears to be an enforceable contract.
????-9-

Question 2
Able was low on money and short on credit, so he borrowed money from a loan shark who was associated with organized crime. When Able failed to meet the repayment deadline, the loan shark told Able he had one more day to come up with the money or Able would find it "very, very painful."
Frightened and desperate, Able decided to break into the home of Rich and steal a collection of valuable antique coins. (Able had done some carpentry jobs for Rich on occasion, so he was familiar with his home.) Able knew that the coin collection was kept in a safe in a small room in Rich's home, so he asked Baker to help him with the heist. Baker was a master welder and Able knew Baker's skills would come in handy if they were to steal the coins. Baker agreed and brought a blowtorch with him that night. Able and Baker easily gained entry to the house by cutting a hole in the back door and entered through the hole. They quickly disabled the alarm system and then Baker went to work on the safe with his blowtorch. They had nearly gotten the safe open when Able knocked over the blowtorch. It ignited some curtains nearby and the fire quickly spread. Soon the whole structure was ablaze. Able and Baker fled without having taken anything.
Sam and Carol lived next door to Rich and the fire soon jumped from Rich's home to their residence. Carol woke up, smelled the smoke, and ran into the living room. Her husband, Sam, was sleeping on the couch. Carol was very angry with Sam. He had told her earlier that evening that he wanted a divorce and Carol now saw a chance for revenge. Carol ran from the burning house, leaving him asleep on the couch. By the time Sam awoke, the house was full of flames and heavy dark smoke. He tried to exit the house, but was quickly overcome by the fire and died.
What crimes, if any, have been committed by Able, Baker, and Carol, and what defenses should each assert? Discuss.
-10-

Crimes of Able and Baker
Solicitation
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
??Solicitation occurs when a person counsels, solicits, incites, or requests another person to do an unlawful act. When Able "asked Baker" to help him with "the heist," Able committed solicitation because he requested Baker to participate in a burglary and larceny (discussed infra).
Merger Rule
Solicitation mergers with the target crime and with attempt and conspiracy. Therefore, although Able committed solicitation, he will most likely be charged instead with conspiracy and with the other crimes discussed infra.
Conspiracy
A conspiracy exists when two or more people are in an agreement to commit a criminal or unlawful act or to commit a lawful act by unlawful or criminal means. When Baker "agreed" to Able's solicitation, a conspiracy was formed and both Able and Baker may be charged with conspiracy to commit burglary and conspiracy to commit larceny.
Burglary
Burglary, at common law, is the breaking and entering of the dwelling house of another during the nighttime with the intent to commit a felony therein.
Breaking - Able (A) and Baker (B) gained entry to Rich's house by cutting a hole in the back door with a blowtorch. This constitutes a breaking because they made a hole.
Entering - the facts state that A and B entered Rich's house through the hole they had made in the back door.
Dwelling - A and B broke into and entered Rich's home, which is a dwelling.
Night - The facts state that B brought a blowtorch with him "that night," which indicates the burglary occurred at nighttime.
Intent to Commit a Felony - the facts state that A and B intended to steal valuable antique coins. It is likely that the value of the coins was over $500, which means that stealing them would be a felony, so intent to commit a felony is established. Even if it turns out that the coins' value was [sic] less than $500, most jurisdictions have statutorily modified the intent required for burglary to include intent to commit any theft, including petty theft.
-11-
????????
Therefore, A and B can be charged with burglary. Attempted Larceny
An attempt occurs when a criminal intent becomes accompanied by an act which comes within close proximity of committing a crime.
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
A and B intended to steal Rich's valuable antique coins. This indicates that they had the criminal intent to commit larceny because the coins belonged to Rich, A and B had no right to them, and they presumably intended to permanently deprive Rich of the coins. They broke into the house with a blowtorch and disabled the alarm system. B then tried to get the safe open. Their breaking in and trying to get the coins from the safe were overt acts and they came within very close proximity of completing their goal of larceny.
However, because of the fire which A started when he knocked over the blowtorch, A and B were forced to flee. This cannot be considered as a withdrawal because it was not a voluntary withdrawal (they were forced to flee because of the fire) and because they were already in the zone of perpetration.
Therefore, both A and B can be charged with attempted larceny.
Arson
Arson, at common law, is the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another. Here, since Rich's home was the location of the fire, the element of the dwelling house of another is met. Since the facts state that the "structure was ablaze" it indicates that the house was actually burned. Therefore the issue is whether the burning can be considered malicious.
While it appears that A and B did not have the intent to burn Rich's house, malice includes an intent to commit a dangerous felony. Therefore, a court may conclude that while they did not have specific intent to burn the house, their intent to commit a dangerous felony such as burglary and larceny will suffice for malice. If the court so determines, then A and B may be charged with arson.
A and B will argue this issue, especially because of the death of Sam as a result of the fire. They will maintain that they did not intend to start the fire (or cause the death, which is discussed below) and that it was an accident. However, in light of the fact that they were using a blowtorch, it seems foreseeable that a fire could start. B may argue that as a master welder, it was not foreseeable that he would start a fire with the torch. However, since B and A were co-conspirators, A's kicking over of the torch will be attributed as an act of both A and B.
-12-
??
Further, since the fire spread from Rich's house to Sam and Carol's house, A and B will be charged with arson as to both homes.
Homicide
Homicide is the killing of one human being by another human being. Sam died as a result of the fire started by A and B and is therefore a homicide.
Causation
Actual Cause
"But for" the fire started by A and B, Sam would not have died. Therefore, the fire was an actual cause of Sam's death. If the court determines, as is likely according to the discussion of arson supra, A and B will be deemed to be actual causes of Sam's death.
Proximate Cause
As discussed under arson, the fire was a foreseeable result of A and B's burglary and attempted larceny. However, A and B will argue that Carol's refusal to wake Sam was an intervening act which breaks the chain of causation. However, since it would have been just as fores eeable f or Sam to have been alone in his home with no one available to waken him, and since it would have been foreseeable for Carol to have also died, the lack of awakening Sam will not break the chain of causation and A and B will be held to be the proximate cause of Sam's death.
Murder
Murder is the killing of one human being by another human being with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought can be found through the commission of a dangerous felony, so A and B will be charged with the murder of Sam.
Murder in the First Degree
Murder in the first degree can be charged as a result of a death that occurs during the commission of a dangerous felony, that is, through the application of the Felony Murder Rule.
Burglary is considered to be a dangerous felony which can be used for application of the felony murder rule. The death must also be f ound to b e causall y connect ed to the burglary. This is satisfied in this case because if A and B had not burglarized Rich's home with the blowtorch, the fire would not have started. Therefore, the death of Sam is directly attributable to the burglary and the felony murder rule will attach.
-13-
??????
Therefore, A and B can be charged with the murder in the first degree of Sam.
Defenses
Duress
In addition to the arguments already discussed under each crime above, Able will argue that he acted under duress because the loan shark had threatened him with something "very, very painful." However, the threat was related to a future harm, not an imminent one. Public policy would favor calling the police, not committing a burglary when a person is threatened. So the defense of duress will fail.
State v. Carol
Murder
Carol saw a "chance for revenge" and so chose not to awaken Sam to save him from the fire. The question is whether she can be charged with Sam's murder or a related crime.
Omission
Normally, the actus reus of a crime must be by intentional or volitional act. Here, Carol did not "do" anything to Sam to kill him. Her actus reus would be an act of omission in not awakening him. When a person has not created the situation which caused the death of another, that person is usually under no duty to rescue the endangered person. While under tort law, a close relationship like that of husband and wife may impose a duty of acting to save the other, criminal law is less likely to impose guilt for such a failure to act.
Carol did not start the fire which killed Sam and even though the facts indicate that she had the appropriate mens rea by wanting revenge and allowing him to die, Carol cannot be held criminally liable for the fire she did not start, nor for the death that resulted from that fire.
Therefore, Carol will not be charged with any crime related to Sam's death.
?????-14-

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
What crimes, if any, have been committed by Able, Baker, and Carol, and what defenses should each assert?
I. Crimes of Able
A. Is Able guilty of solicitation?
Solicitation occurs when the defendant request [sic] that another commit a crime. It is not necessary that the other agree or even acknowledge the communication.
The facts tell us that Able asked Baker to help him steal the valuable antique coins. The act of asking is sufficient for Able to be convicted of solicitation.
B. Able for Conspiracy
Conspiracy occurs when the defendant agrees with another to commit a crime. The crime is complete at the time of the agreement. Thus the plan need not succeed for the defendants to be convicted.
The facts tell us that Baker agreed to Able's proposal to steal the coins.
Some jurisdictions require an act of furtherance of the crime for the defendant to be convicted of conspiracy.
Here Baker and Able did commit a number of act [sic] and almost succeeded in their plan had it not been for the fire. Therefore, both Able and Baker can be convict ed of con spiracy.
C. Able for Burglary
Burglary is the breaking and entering of the dwelling house of another at night with the intent to commit a felony inside.
Modern courts have abandoned the "at night" requirement (common law) and have extended the "dwelling house" requirement to include any structure.
Since Able and Baker gained access to Rich's house by cutting a hole in the back door they most certainly committed a breaking and entering.
The facts tell us that the defendants entered Rich's home.
The facts also tell us that the defendants intended to commit larceny (steal the valuable coins).
-15-
???
Based on the discussion above, Able (and Baker) are guilty of burglary. D. Arson
Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another. Mere charring of the structure is sufficient. Modern court [sic] have extended this doctrine to include commercial structures as well.
Was the burning malicious?
The facts tell us that the defendants did not intend to burn Rich's house. Therefore they will most likely be found not guilty of arson.
E. Murder of Sam
Even though defendants did not intend the death of Sam, under the felony-murder rule a defendant is guilty of second degree murder if he causes a homicide in the cause of committing an inherently dangerous felony.
A homicide is the killing of one human being by another.
Was burglary an inherently dangerous felony?
Burglary is an inherently dangerous felony because it involves the risk that the occupants of the home will be present at the time the defendants break and enter into the home and that a confrontation may result which may become deadly.
Therefore Able and Baker are most likely guilty of the death of Sam. F. Able for attempted larceny
The crime of larceny occurs when defendant commits an [sic] trespassing taking of the personal property of another with an intent to permanently deprive them of that property.
An attempt is committed when the defendant has the mental state recognized for the commission of the target offense and has completed a substantial step toward the completion of the target offense but cannot be convicted of the target offense.
A lesser-included offense is an offense which consist [sic] of some but not all of the elements of another crime and no other elements.
The facts tell us that Able and Baker intended to steal the valuable coins. Since they were unsuccessful in stealing the coins, but were very close to doing so they can be convicted of attempt.
-16-
????
However, since larceny is a lesser included offense of the crime of burglary the defendants cannot be convicted of both.
II. Crimes of Baker A. Conspiracy
See discussion above. Baker is guilty since he agreed with Able to commit larceny and took a substantial step.
B. Burglary
See discussion above. Baker is guilty of burglary since he committed a breaking and entering of the dwelling house of Rich with an intent to commit a felony inside (steal the coins).
C. Arson
See discussion above (Able). Just like Able, Baker will most likely be found not liable for arson since he lacked the malicious intent.
D. Murder of Sam
See discussion above (Able). Similarly to Able, Baker will be guilty of second degree murder under the felony-murder rule.
E. Attempted Larceny See discussion above.
III. Crimes of Carol
To decide whether Carol is guilty of a homicide we must examine the murder crimes. These fall into four categories; (1) First Degree, (2) Second degree (3) Voluntary Manslaughter and (4) involuntary Manslaughter.
Generally, all crimes require (1) mens rea - a requisite mental state, (2) actus reus - a voluntary act or an omission to act when one has a duty to act, (3) concurrence, & (4) causation - the act must cause the criminal result.
The general rule is that one has no duty to act to prevent the commission of a crime or a tort against another.
-17-
?????
However, there are a number of exceptions to this rule. One has a duty to act when (1) he is related to the victim (i.e., spouse or parent, only close relatives) (2) contractual duty (as in guards) (3) [sic]
Did Carol possess the necessary mens-rea?
The facts tell us that Carol was angry at Sam because he had informed her that he desired a divorce. They also tell us that she "wanted a revenge", and that she took advantage of the situation to execute that revenge.
Did Carol commit the necessary act?
As stated above, Carol does not have to perform an act, but a mere failure to perform an act when she has a duty to act reasonably under the circumstances to aid her husband.
Was there concurrence?
Yes, the mens-rea and actus reus concurred.
Was there causation?
Yes, Carol's failure to wake up Sam caused his death. All that was necessary for Carol to do was wake him up. Therefore, Carol is guilty of second-degree murder.
IV. Defenses
A. Defenses of Able
(a) Duress.
Duress negates the intent to commit a crime. Where defendant has been threatened with physical force he may rely on the defense of duress. However, the force or the threat of force must be imminent where the force is to occur sometime in the future. The defendant cannot claim that he is under duress because the defendant had the ability to move around freely and could have informed the police or filed charges against the loan shark.
B. Defenses of Carol
Carol can assert the defense of depraved-heart. She can claim that the fact that Sam had asked her for a divorce had caused her to snap and that she was not capable of thinking straight or controlling her emotions. She will argue that her sentence should be reduced to voluntary manslaughter. One is guilty of voluntary manslaughter when he acts in the heat of passion (i.e., when they witness a spouse cheating), or when they rely on imperfect self-defense (i.e., when they thought that they had a right to use self-defense but the force they used was disproportionately greater than the force that was necessary). Since a lot
-18-

of time had passed between the moment Sam requested the divorce and the time of Carol's failure to wake him up this defense will most likely fail.
-19-

Question 3
Paintco intended to place a bid on the painting work for a large government project, the deadline for which was April 16. Paintco's president published an advertisement in a local trade paper asking paint suppliers to place bids with Paintco for the furnishing of 10,000 gallons of special paint in accordance with the government's specifications. The advertisement, published March 1, stated that Paintco was going to bid on the government job, and asked all interested parties to submit their bids, in writing, on or before April 15, specifying that the bids were to be "irrevocable for 30 days."
On the evening of April 15, Ritzcorp's president telephoned Paintco and submitted Ritzcorp's bid orally by leaving a message on Paintco's answering machine, which was equipped with a voice-decoding feature that translated telephone messages into a written printout. The telephone message, which Paintco's president both heard and read that evening, identified the speaker as Ritzcorp's president and stated that his company would supply 8,500 gallons of paint to Paintco at a price of $10 per gallon. The telephone message also stated that the bid price did not include the cost of delivery, that any acceptance of Ritzcorp's bid must be in writing and must be received by Ritzcorp on or before May 1.
Because Ritzcorp's bid was the lowest, Paintco used it to compute the price of its own irrevocable bid to the government the next d ay. On May 1, Paintco was notified that it had won the government contract. The same day it mailed a letter to Ritzcorp stating: "We accept your offer of April 15, but ask that the paint be fully warranted as to quality and that you arrange for delivery of 10,000 gallons of the paint to the job site." The letter arrived at Ritzcorp's offices on May 2. Ritzcorp dispatched an e-mail to Paintco that very afternoon, stating that in light of an unexpected rise in the cost of ingredients it was only prepared to offer a price per gallon of $12, and that any paint Paintco chose to purchase would be sold "as is," without any warranties. After subsequent talks between the parties failed to resolve their differences, Paintco promptly secured a commitment from the next lowest bidder, BrushCorp, to supply all 10,000 gallons at a price of $14 per gallon. Paintco then immediately wrote a letter to Ritzcorp declaring that Ritzcorp had repudiated its contractual commitment to supply paint, and threatening to hold it accountable for all damages. Paintco completed the government job using the paint supplied by BrushCorp.
What action(s) can Paintco reasonably assert against Ritzcorp, and what would be the likely result of these action(s)? Discuss.
-20-

U.C.C. v. COMMON LAW
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3 PAINTCO v. RITZCORP
??The U.C.C. governs contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are moveable and identifiable chattle at the time of sale.
Paint is a moveable and identifiable chattle at the time of sale.
Thus, this contract will be governed by the U.C.C.
MERCHANTS
One who regularly deals in the sale and manufacture of goods and who holds himself out to have special skill or knowledge in said goods.
Paintco (P) regularly deals in the sale and manufacture of paint, and holds himself out to have special skill or knowledge in paint.
Ritzcorp (R) regularly deals in the sale and manufacture of paint, and holds himself out to have special skill or knowledge in paint.
Both P and R will be held by a higher standard of good faith. Thus, both parties are merchants.
PRELIMINARY NEGOTIATIONS
ADVERTISEMENT
Here, the facts indicate that P made an [sic] public offer to all subcontractors inviting them to place their bids with P. In [sic] invitation to bid is usually held to be an advertisement and not an offer.
There is a valid advertisement for an invitation to bargain.
Although P was not making an offer, the courts will find that as a merchant, P must keep the offer open in good faith for a period of no more than 30 days.
The parties are in preliminary negotiations.
-21-
???
OFFER
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is certain and definite in its terms and which is communicated to the offeree.
Here, the facts indicate that R made an outward manifestation of present contractual intent. Under the U.C.C. the only element required for a valid offer is the quantity term. All the other terms that are not present will be determined in a reasonable way.
Quantity - 8,500 Gallons
Time for performance - April 16th
Identity of parties - P and R
Price - $10/Gallon = $85,000
Subject Matter - Paint
Therefore, under the U.C.C. all the required terms are present. MERCHANT'S FIRM OFFER RULE
A signed written offer by a merchants [sic] which promises that it will be held open for a time stated without consideration will be held open (or if time is stated then for a reasonable time) taken that the offer does not stay open for more than 3 months.
The facts indicate that when R made the offer it promised that the offer would be held open until May 1.
Here, P will argue that there was no writing but that the offer was made orally. The facts tell us that the oral offer was translated into a written document. The courts will probably find that the signature requirement would be satisfied if there was an electronic type of R's name or company name.
The courts will probably construe this oral offer as a written document based on the facts. Thus, there is a valid offer.
ACCEPTANCE
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is certain and definite in its terms.
-22-
???
Since this contract is being governed by the U.C.C. its acceptance will be determined by U.C.C. 2-207.
U.C.C. 2-207
Where an offeror makes a seasonable [sic] expression of acceptance and assent to the terms of an offer, which may be accepted with additional or different terms unless acceptance is expressly limited to the terms of the offer.
Here we find that on May 1 P sent written acceptance to R of its mutual assent to the terms of the contract.
However, the facts tell us that the acceptance was made with additional and different terms.
There are three ways in which an additional or different term can be excluded from an acceptance:
1. Acceptance is expressly limited to the terms of the offer
2. The Acceptance materially alters the contract
3. The Acceptance does not give the offeror reasonable time to accept the additional or different terms.
Additional Terms
The additional term was that P asked R to fully warrant the quality of the paint.
In the facts at issue the court will find that the warranty for merchantability of the product was not expressly limited to terms of the offer, and that this additional fact did not materially alter the contract.
In addition R had a reasonable time to reject the terms of the offer.
Thus, the courts will find that this warranty promise will be included in the acceptance.
Different Terms
The different terms was [sic] that P asked R for 10,000 gallons instead of the 8,500 gallons.
Where there are different terms two rules will determine whether they stay in the acceptance or not:
Knockout Rule
The different terms will be knocked out of the contract if they materially alter the contract.
-23-
???
In this situation the increase of the gallons from 8,500 to 10,000 will be held as materially altering the contract.
Thus, this terms [sic] will be knocked out of the contract.
Dropout Rule
The different terms will be dropped out if they materially alter the contract.
Since this different term materially alters the contract it will be dropped out of the contract.
Thus the courts will find that the warranty term will be included in the terms, but that the increase in gallons will be excluded.
CONSIDERATION
A bargained for exchange of legal detriment.
P bargained for $10/gallon, his detriment, in exchange for 8,500 gallons, his benefit. R bargained for 8,500, his detriment in exchange for $10/gallon.
Thus, there is valid consideration.
DEFENSES
STATUTE OF FRAUDS
Contracts for the sale of goods of $500 or more
Here the facts indicate that this contract was for the price of $85,000. Thus a writing would be required under the U.C.C. Statute of Frauds.
Since a sufficient memorandum will suffice for the Statute of Frauds, the written agreements that have been sent between the parties will take the contract out of the Statute of Frauds.
Thus, the Statute of Frauds will not apply. MODIFICATION
Under the U.C.C. a modification can be made to the contract without consideration, but in good faith.
Here the facts indicate that R sent a written e-mail to P stating that he would like to modify the contract due to unexpected rise in the cost of the gallons.
-24-
??????
An unexpected rise in the cost of the gallons will not be acceptable since the party should have foreseen or had a reason to know of the change in price.
Also, R attempted to sell the gallons as is.
Under the U.C.C. any modification that attempts to change the warranty term will be considered to materially alter the contract and thus be invalid.
Here the courts will find that under the U.C.C. 2-207 Battle of Forms discussed supra, these terms would materially alter the contract.
Thus, these terms will not be considered as valid modifications.
CONDITIONS
IMPLIED IN FACT CONDITION PRECEDENT OF GOOD FAITH Every contract has an implied in fact condition precedent of good faith.
In this case, R would be required to ship, in good faith, the gallons, before P had a duty to make payment under the contract.
CONDITIONS SATISFIED OR EXCUSED ANTICIPATORY REPUDIATION
R will argue that P repudiated the contract and thus excused his condition to make payment.
DUTY
R has a duty to ship 8,500 gallons of paint for $10/gallon. DUTY DISCHARGED
IMPRACTICABILITY
R will argue that it was impracticable for him to perform under the contract since the price increased from $10 to $12. However, based on the 10 TIMES RULE, there is no impracti cability.
???????Thus, there is no impracticability.
-25-

FRUSTRATION OF PURPOSE
R may argue Frustration of purpose, but there will be no discharged [sic] because there was not objective frustration of purpose for the contract.
IMPOSSIBILITY
R may argue Impossibility, but the court will find not destruction of the goods or the contract.
BREACH
MAJOR BREACH
R committed a major breach when it did not agree to ship the goods for $10/gallon. This breach went to the heart of the contract.
REMEDIES
GENERAL DAMAGES
P will be able to recover his loss of expectancy under the contract. He will be placed in the position he would have been had the contract not been breached.
Cover
P mitigated his losses when he bought the goods from Brushcorp (B). He will be able to recover the difference in the contract price and the cost of cover.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
If the damages were consequential and foreseeable at the time of the contract, then P will be able to recover damages under Hadly v. Baxendale.
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE
If the goods were considered special or unique P may be able to recover specific performance.
-26-
??????????
PAINTCO AND RITZCORP
Does the UCC apply?
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
?The UCC applies to all transactions in goods. Goods are moveable, tangible property.
Here, the transaction is for the sale of paint, moveable tangible property.
Therefore, the UCC applies.
Are the parties merchants?
Merchants are persons who regularly deal in that type of goods or, through their occupation, have special knowledge and skill pertaining to the goods.
Here, Paintco is a professional painting company, who regularly buys paint. Ritzcorp sells paint.
Therefore, both parties are merchants. Valid enforceable contract?
In order to have a valid enforceable contract, there must be an offer, acceptance, consideration and lack of defenses.
Was the ad an offer?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent, containing definite and certain terms, communicated to an identified offeree.
An advertisement such as a printed flyer or trade paper ad is normally considered to be an invitation to make offers, because the offeror could not possibly accept an infinite number of acceptances.
Here, Paintco's ad was an invitation to negotiate or make offers. Therefore, the ad was not a[n] offer.
Was the phone call an offer? Offer defined supra.
Here, Ritzcorp was making an oral offer with definite terms and communicated directly to Paintco.
-27-
????
The ad said to submit the offers in writing, but Ritzcorp departed from this. Since the ad was not an offer, its stated method of acceptance did not have to match the terms [of] Ritzcorp's ad.
Therefore, Ritzcorp made a valid offer. Acceptance:
Acceptance is an assent to the terms of the offer. It can be made in the manner indicated by the offer, or in any reasonable manner.
Here, Paintco accepted the offer for 8,500 gallons. Their assent was made in the manner stated in the offer (by May 1 and in writing).
The letter satisfied the writing requirement. Mailbox rule:
Acceptances are effective on dispatch, if the acceptance was made in the manner required by the offer.
Here, the acceptance was in writing and dispatched by May 1.
Therefore, the mailbox rule applies and there is a valid acceptance.
Consideration:
Considerationisalegallysufficientbargained-forexchange,inducingcurrentperformance, a detriment to the promissee, and binding on both parties.
Here, the agreement is to exchange paint for money. It [sic] as bargained for, will induce performance and will be binding. It is a detriment to both parties.
Therefore, there is valid consideration.
DEFENSES:
Statute of frauds:
The statute of frauds requires all contracts for goods of $500 or more to be in writing. Here, the statute applies, because the paint would cost 8,500 times $10 = $85,000. Therefore, there can be a possible statute of frauds defense.
-28-
????
Merchant's confirmatory memorandum to satisfy the statute of frauds:
A merchant's confirmatory memorandum can satisfy the statute if it is in writing and would serve to bind the sender, the recipient has reason to know its contents and the recipient does not object within 10 days.
Here, the letter from Paintco would be binding on Paintco, Ritz[corp] has reason to know of its contents because it is in response to their offer and Ritzco[rp] has not objected.
Therefore, the letter will satisfy the statute of frauds and there is a binding contract. Terms of the contract:
Between merchants, the contract will contain the terms of the offer and will include any new terms in the acceptance unless:
1. The offer did not allow new or changed terms
2. The new terms are material
3. The terms are objected to within a reasonable time.
Material terms are those that would result in the significant loss of the benefit of the bargain or result in surprise or hardship.
Here, Paintco accepted for the offer of 8500 gallons at $10.
The new term of "fully warranted" will be new if the warranty was not already implied.
Since a warranty of merchantability is already implied by law, this term is not new and will not change the deal.
The change of 8500 gallons to 10,000 is material. Even though Paintco wanted 10,000 originally, Ritzco[rp] only offered 8500 and Paintco accepted that.
Therefore, the terms are for 8500 gallons at $10 each and include the normal implied warranties.
Anticipatory repudiation (AR):
AR occurs when a party unequivocally indicates that it will not perform on the contract.
Here, Ritzco[rp] indicated that it was only prepared to deal at $12 per gallon. This created doubt as to their intent to perform.
Therefore, Paintco may have grounds to treat that $12 price statement as AR.
-29-
???
Assurances under the UCC:
When a party indicates that it might not perform under a contract, the other party has grounds to demand assurances. The assurances can be in any manner generally accepted in that industry, but must provide a sense of confidence that performance will be forthcoming.
Here, when Ritzco[rp] said it was only prepared to offer a price of $12, this created doubt of their intent to perform.
Paintco tried to obtain assurances by "subsequent talks," which would probably be the first step in that industry.
Therefore, when they "failed to resolve their differences" Paintco was within its rights to declare that Ritzco[rp] had repudiated.
Remedy for AR:
When AR occurs, the [o]ther party may consider the contract rescinded as to the executory part, may sue immediately, may sue on law date or may ignore the AR and urge performance. The non-repudiating party may sue for breach.
Here, Paintco has chosen to declare breach. Therefore, Paintco can recover for breach. Damages for breach:
In the case of breach, the non-breaching party may effect cover in the market and sue for market differential and indicentals [sic] and consequential damages. This will put the non- breacher in the same position as if the contract had not been breached. The non- breaching party has a duty to mitigate by avoiding any damages where feasible.
Here, the acceptance was for 8500 gallons at $10. Paintco covered at $14. The additional costs to Paintco were $4 per gallon X 8500 gallons or $34,000.
There are no apparent consequential damages, since Paintco was able to mitigate by covering.
Therefore, Paintco can recover $34,000 plus indicentals [sic].
-30-
???
Question 4
Peter, walking along the street at 10:00 p.m. on April 20, urgently needed to find a restroom. Just ahead was Dell's Supper Club ("Dell's"), which Peter had patronized a few times in the past. There was a sign on the door of Dell's that said "Restrooms for Patrons Only." He was not familiar with Dell's restroom. He entered the dimly lit club and was directed by a waitress toward a door marked "MEN". Peter opened this door and stepped into an even darker room. Just inside the door, Peter felt for and pushed a light switch, but no light came on because the bulb in the ceiling fixture was burned out. Nevertheless, Peter walked towards what he thought was the toilet, but tripped over a step, fell, and suffered severe cuts and bruises.
Later that night at Dell's John ordered a steak with mushrooms. Dell's used canned mushrooms purchased from Acme Foods, which three weeks earlier had discovered that some of its canned mushrooms had been improperly prepared and if eaten could cause botulism. Acme Foods notified all its customers of the problems with the canned mushrooms and offered to replace any cans of mushrooms purchased from them. Dell's received this notice, but disregarded it. John was served some of the mushrooms in question and as a result contracted botulism, recovering only after five days of severe illness and hospital treatment.
At 6:00 a.m. the next morning Carl, who was paid to pick up the garbage at Dell's, drove to the back of the club to carry out his duties. He did not see Dell's large guard dog chained next to the bin to keep out trespassers, and the dog was asleep when Carl entered the bin. As Carl walked to the bin, he startled the dog and it attacked Carl. The dog grabbed Carl's shoe and held on tightly. Carl managed to get his foot out of the shoe, ran to the fence surrounding the back of the restaurant, and climbed over it to get away from the dog. Once he reached the top of the fence, he fell to the ground on the other side and broke his leg.
What actions could Peter, John and Carl assert against Dell's, what defenses should Dell's assert, and what would be the probable results? Discuss.
-31-

Negligence
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
Under tort law negligence is a failure to act as a reasonably prudent person in the same circumstances. A prima facie case of negligence requires a showing of duty, breach, proximate and actual causation, and damages.
1. Peter v. Dell's (P v. D) A. Negligence
1. Standard of care
Under tort law the standard of care is that of a reasonably prudent person in the same situation.
Here D is a landowner because P was injured on their property. Therefore D is held to the standard of care of other landowners.
2. Duty
Under common law there was no general duty to act affirmatively to protect others.
Under Palsgraf, Cordozo argued that D owes a duty only to those in the zone of danger to protect foreseeable plaintiffs from foreseeable harm.
Andrews argued that if D owes a duty to anyone he owes a duty to everyone. Here there is a special duty because D is a landowner as discussed above. The specific level of duty D owes to P depends on the status of P.
A. P as trespasser
Under common law landowners owed no duty to trespassers. Modernly landowne rs owe a duty to known trespassers to avoid from actively causing them harm from the landowner's use or activities on the land.
Here P may be considered a known trespasser because although he was not going to buy anything at D's the waitress knew that he was going into the restroom marked for patrons only because the waitress directed him there.
-32-

Therefore if P is considered a known trespasser D owed him a duty not to actively cause him harm from their use or activities on the land.
B. P as licensee
Under tort law landowners owe a duty to licensee, those on the property with permission but not to convey a benefit to landowner, to warn them of known artificial dangers on their land.
Here P may be considered a licensee because although he did not intend to buy anything this time he had visited a few times in the past and as D was a "Supper Club" it may be reasonable to find that P was licensed to enter D's land.
Therefore if P is considered a known trespasser D owed him a duty to warn of known artificial dangers on the land.
3. Breach
UndertheLearnedHandCalculusbreachcanbefoundwheretheburdenofpreventingthe harm to P combined with the social utility of D's acts are not outweighed by the likelihood of harm occurring to P times the magnitude of harm which might occur.
Here the burden of preventing the harm to P may have been small if the bulb has been out for awhile and no one at D's inspected the restroom periodically.
Here there is no social utility in not checking the restrooms.
Here the likelihood of injury is high because it is reasonable to find that if a lightbulb is burnt out that someone may hurt themselves in the dark.
Here the magnitude of harm is high because a restroom is a potentially dangerous place in the dark and someone could fall and hit their head causing serious harm or even death.
Therefore D breached his duty to P. 4. Actual cause
Under tort law actual causation will be found where but/for the negligence of D the plaintiff would not have been harmed.
Here but/for D's negligence is [sic] not changing the lightbulb P would not have been harmed because P would have seen the step and not tripped.
Therefore D is an actual cause of P's harm.
-33-

5. Proximate cause
Under tort law P's injury must not have occurred in a way to [sic] unforeseen or removed from the negligent acts of the defendant.
Here P's injury was foreseeable because as discussed above P fell because there was no light and it is reasonably foreseeable that if there is no light in a bathroom someone could get hurt.
Here there are no intervening acts because although the bulb burnt [sic] out it['s] not unforeseeable, because bulbs burn out all the time.
Therefore D is the proximate cause of P's harm. 6. Damages
Under tort law victims of negligence must suffer damages in order to be compensated. Here P suffered damages because he suffered severe cuts and bruises.
Therefore P suffered compensable damages.
B. D's defenses
1. Contributory negligence
Under tort law contributory negligence is a minority doctrine that any negligence by P acts as a complete bar to recovery. Even in a contributory negligence jurisdiction P can recover if D had the "last chance" to prevent the harm to P.
Here there if [sic] contributory negligence because P saw that the light didn't come on but went into the restroom anyway.
Here D did not have the last change [sic] to prevent P's harm because P could have avoided the harm at the last change [sic] by not entering.
Therefore in a contributory negligence jurisdiction D would have a defense to P's claim of negligence.
2. Comparative negligence
Under tort law comparative negligence is a majority doctrine that any negligence by P is not a bar to recovery but acts to reduce the damages payable by D by the percentage that P's own negligence contributed to his own injuries.
-34-

Here as discussed above P was also negligent in entering a dark room.
Therefore in a comparative negligence jurisdiction any award for damages to P would be reduced by the percent of his own negligence.
3. Assumption of the risk
Under tort law if P knowingly and voluntarily assumes the risk of his own actions it is a complete bar to recovery.
Here P knew that the room was dark but he did not know that there was a step in the room.
Therefore although he voluntarily entered the room he did not do so with a complete knowledge of the risk he was assuming and assumption of the risk fails as a defense to D's negligence.
2. John v. Dell (J v. D)
A. Strict liability in tort
Under tort law those in the chain of marketing are strictly liable for injuries caused by defective products.
1. Manufacturing defect
Under tort law a manufacturing defect exists when a product is not produced as designed and such manufacturing defect causes injury.
Here there is a manufacturing defect because the mushrooms were improperly prepared and could cause botulism.
a. Consumer expectation test
Under the consumer expectation test a product defect exists if the product fails to function as a reasonable consumer would expect.
Here there is a failure of the consumer expectation test because a reasonably [sic] consumer would not expect a mushroom to cause botulism.
2. Proper plaintiff
Under strict liability in torts a duty is owed to foreseeable users and those foreseeably affected by the defective product.
-35-

Here there is a foreseeable user because it is foreseeable that a restaurant would buy mushrooms and use them in food they served to their guests.
Therefore J is a foreseeable user. 3. Proper defendant
Under strict liability in torts all those in the chain of marketing a defective product are liable for the harm caused.
Here D is in the chain of marketing because they sold the mushrooms with the steak they served to J.
Therefore D is a proper defendant. 4. Actual cause
Supra
Here D is the actual cause of J's harm because but/for them [sic] serving the mushrooms J would not have been harmed.
5. Proximate cause Supra
Here D is the proximate cause of J's harm because contracting botulism is a foreseeable result of serving bad mushrooms.
6. Damages Supra
Here P suffered damages because he got sick and had to go the hospital. 7. Defenses
Here there is no evidence that J was aware of the risk or that he was in any way negligent. Therefore D has no defense to J's claim of strict liability.
B. Negligence
The discussion for negligence mirrors the discussion for strict liability in tort with the exception that negligence requires a showing of breach while strict liability does not.
-36-

Supra
1. Breach
Here the burden of preventing the harm would have been to not disregard the notice they received warning of the danger.
Here there is no social utility in not reading the notice.
Here the likelihood of harm is high because Acme told them it was.
Here the magnitude of potential harm is high because botulism is a serious illness requiring hospitalization.
Therefore D breached their duty to J and is liable for negligence. C. Warranty
Under tort law all products carry with them an implied warranty of merchantability that they are fit for their intended use.
Here mushrooms are intended to be used as food.
Here the mushrooms were not fit for use as food because they caused botulism. Therefore D breached the implied warranty of merchantability.
3. Carl v. Dell (C v. D)
A. Strict liability
Under tort law defendants are strictly liable for harm caused by wild animals or domestic animals who are known to be dangerous.
Here there is an anima l known to be dange rous because it is reasonable to find that a large guard dog kept chained in a fence to keep out trespassers would be a danger to anyone he encountered.
Therefore D is strictly liable to C for the damage done by the guard dog. B. Actual cause
Supra
Here but/for the guard dog C would not have climbed the fence and fell, breaking his leg.
-37-

Therefore D is an actual cause of C's harm. C. Proximate cause
Supra
Here it is not unforeseeable that if a dangerous dog attacked someone they would try to get away and get injured in the attempt.
Therefore D is the proximate cause of C's harm. D. Damages
Supra
Here C is injured because he broke his leg. Therefore C suffered compensable injuries.
E. Defenses
Here there is no evidence that C was aware of the risk because he did not see the dog and it was asleep when he entered the bin. There is also no evidence that C was in any way negligent.
Therefore D has no defense to C's claim of strict liability. 2. Negligence
Here as discussed above D can be found to be negligent in regards to C if it is found that he owed a duty and breached that duty to C.
A. Duty Supra
Landowners owe a duty to invitees to warn of hidden dangers on the property.
Here C can be found to be an invitee because he was on the property to incur a benefit to D, the removal of the garbage.
B. Breach Supra
-38-

Here D breached the duty to C because they did not warn of the dangerous dog on the property.
C. Actual cause Supra
D. Proximate cause Supra
E. Damages Supra
F. Defenses Supra
-39-

1. Peter v. Dell's
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
Peter may be able to recover damages against Dell's for his injuries if he is able to prove the elements of negligence. In order to prevail in a negligence suit, Peter would have to show that Dell's had a duty of care to him which they breached, causing him damages.
Duty: A person ordinarily owes a duty of care to control their own conduct to prevent injury to other people that may result from the things they do. The duty owed may be based on statute, contract, relationship, admission of the duty, or creation of the peril. In this case, duty based on relationship is the important factor.
Here, the relationship between Peter and Dell's is important. Peter has gone onto the property of Dell's to use the restroom, even though Dell's has posted signs that indicate the restroomsareforcustomersonly. Dell'smaywanttoconsiderPeteratrespasser,andthus owed no duty. However, it is reasonably foreseeable that persons may come in off the street to use the facilities; if this were not so, then Dell's would not have posted the sign restricting access to their customers only. Peter is still not a licensee or invitee in this case, but because his trespass is either expected or common, Dell's owes a duty of care to him to warn of artificial hazards and to correct those that can be reasonably fixed.
Therefore, Dell's owes a duty of care to Peter.
Breach: A person has breached their duty of care when their conduct does not rise to the level required to protect others.
Here, Dell's could have replaced the bulbs making the bathroom area so very dark. Under the Hand analysis, if the burden of the precaution is less than the magnitude of the injury times its probability, then a breach has occurred. The burden of replacing a light bulb is small, as is the placing of a sign or notice that there are steps ahead. On the other side of the equation, the probability that someone will trip on the steps in the dark is great, and the magnitude of the possible injury is also great.
Therefore, Dell's has breached its duty of care to Peter.
Causation: In order to be liable, the defendant's conduct must be both the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injury.
Actual cause is found when the defendant's conduct is the but-for cause of the injury, or in some cases a substantial factor in the injury.
Here, since the burned out light and lack of warning led directly to Peter's injury, Dell's breach of duty if [sic] the actual cause of the harm.
-40-

Proximate cause is found when there are no superseding, intervening events.
Here, there are no events intervening between Peter's entry into the restroom area and his accident due to the lack of lighting and signs.
Therefore, Dell's breach of its duty will be found to be the actual and proximate cause of Peter's injury.
Damages: In order to prevail, the plaintiff must show damages.
Here, the facts state that Peter suffered severe cuts and bruises from his fall.
Defenses: Dell's may have some defenses to this action. Defenses include contributory negligence (if the jurisdiction follows contributory negligence), comparative negligence, and assumption of the risk. In contributory negligence, if the plaintiff has any fault in the injury he suffered, then he is barred from recovery. In a comparative negligence jurisdiction, the plaintiff may recover according to the degree of fault assigned to the parties. In pure comparative negligence, he will recover his portion of damages, regardless of how small or large it may be. In modified comparative negligence jurisdictions, he will recover if his fault is 50% or less of the total fault. Under assumption of the risk, Peter would be barred from recovery if it was found that he knew of the risk and voluntarily engaged in the conduct anyway.
In this case, Dell's may assert that by walking into a dark, unfamiliar room, Peter contributed to his own injury. This would create a degree of fault for Peter. There may be some contributory or comparative negligence found here. Since Peter was unaware that there were steps that could harm him, assumption of the risk would not apply here.
Result: In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, Peter would be barred from recovery based on walking into a dark unfamiliar room. In a comparative negligence jurisdiction, he would recover according to the degree of fault he was assigned by the court.
2. John v. Dell's
John may have a cause of action against Dell's under strict liability in tort if he can show thatheisaproperparty,thattheproductwasdefective,thattheproductcausedhimharm, and he suffered damages.
Parties? Proper parties to a suit such as this must be foreseeable users of the product.
In this case, John was a patron of a restaurant serving canned mushrooms which were defective and made him ill. A restaurant customer is a foreseeable user of food supplied to that restaurant.
Therefore, John is a proper party to sue in strict liability.
-41-

Defective product? The product must be shown to be defective either in design, manufacture, or warnings.
Here, the product was produced improperly and could cause botulism. The factory promptly notified its customers of the problem and offered to replace the mushrooms. Clearly they knew that the product was defective. The question is whether Dell's knew of the defect. The facts state that Dell's received the notice but disregarded it.
Therefore, the product is clearly defective in manufacture, and the parties involved were aware of the defect.
Was Dell's conduct the actual and proximate cause of John's harm? As discussed above, Dell's conduct must be shown to be both actual and proximate cause of the harm to John.
Here, Dell's knew of the potential for botulism poisoning from the mushrooms, because they were warned of the possibility, but they chose to ignore the warning and serve the mushroomsanyway. Thisconductclearlycause[sic]themushroomstobeservedtoJohn, causing him illness. There were no other intervening or possible sources of the harm to John.
Therefore, Dell's conduct in serving the mushrooms is the actual and proximate cause of John's injury.
Damages? John must show that he suffered some harm due to the actions of Dell's. Here, the facts state that John suffered five days of illness and hospital treatments. Therefore, John suffered damages from Dell's conduct in serving the mushrooms.
Defenses? In strict liability in tort, there are no provisions for contributory negligence. Dell's would only be able to try to claim that either John knew there was a risk of poisoned mushrooms and ate them anyway, or that he was somehow at fault in eating them. Neither possibility seems likely.
Conclusion: Dell's will be found liable in strict liability in tort for the illness and damages John suffered due to eating the mushrooms.
3. Carl v. Dell's
Carl may be able to recover damages from Dell's in strict liability due to his injuries from Dell's guard dog if he can show that Dell's knew that the dog had dangerous or vicious propensities to harm people. He would also have to show causation and harm in order to collect.
-42-

A person may be held strictly liable for the actions of domestic animals if the animal has a propensity to be vicious. If the dog has bitten before, or been trained to be vicious, then the owner is strictly liable without fault for any damage the dog may do to others.
Here, the facts do not state if Dell's dog has actually ever bitten anyone. However, the facts do state that he is a guard dog, that it is chained up to keep trespassers out, and that [it] is kept in back near the trash bins. All these factors would seem to indicate that the dog is expected to be quite fierce and protective of the property, and may indeed demonstrate a degree of viciousness.
Therefore, by having such an animal, even chained up, Dell assumes the liability of any injuries the dog may inflict.
Causation? Discussed above. Actual and proximate cause required.
Here, the threat of the dog caused Carl to climb the fence from which he fell and broke his leg. The dog was the actual cause of the injury. In addition, Dell's fence was obviously high enough that falling from it, escaping from the dog, was sufficient to cause harm.
Therefore, Dell's is the actual and proximate cause of Carl's injury.
Damages? Carl must show actual injury.
Here, the dog only damaged Carl's shoe. However, in the effort to escape from the dog, Carlclimbedafence,fallingandbreakinghisleg. Theshoeisonlyminordamage,butthe broken leg is much more serious.
Therefore, Carl's damages including his damaged shoe and broken leg will be found to be injuries caused by the dog threat.
Defenses?
There are none.
Result?
Dell's is liable for Carl's damages.
-43-


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2004
California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2004 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2004 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Torts 1 Contracts 11 Criminal Law 21
???Torts
36
-i-

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?-ii-

Question 1
Penelope and her friends went shopping at Deals Department Stores ("Deals"). They entered Deals on the first floor and decided to take the elevator to the third floor. Penelope pressed the button for the elevator. While waiting for it to arrive, Penelope chatted with her friends with her back to the elevator door. When she heard the elevator door open, Penelope, without looking, stepped backward into the elevator opening while continuing to chat with her friends. No elevator car was present, she fell into the shaft, and dropped fifteen feet to the basement floor.
While Penelope suffered only minor physical injuries as a result of her fall, shortly thereafter she suffered an acute psychotic breakdown from which she has not recovered. Penelope's doctors have concluded that the elevator accident aggravated a pre-existing psychological condition which has caused permanent disabilities.
Deals owns the store building and contracts with Reliable Elevator Company ("Reliable") to maintain the elevator. Reliable also manufactured and installed the elevator. This type of accident involving a Reliable elevator has never happened before and there is no evidence of what caused the elevator car to be out of position when the elevator door opened.
1. Under what theory or theories should Penelope bring an action for recovery of damages for her injuries, and against whom? Discuss.
2. What defenses should be raised and what are the likely results? Discuss.
-1-

 TORTS
Negligence:
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
Penelope v. Deals Department Stores ["Deals"]
Negligence is a breach of a legal duty that actually and proximately causes damages to another.
Duty:
A duty is what a reasonable prudent person would be required to do or not do under the same or similar circumstances.
Landowners owe no duty to trespassers but do owe a duty of care to persons they invite onto their land.
Invitee:
An invitee is a person invited onto the landowner[']s premises for monetary exchange type of business tran[s]actions. A landowner owes the duty to inspect the premises for hidden defects that may pose a danger to the invitee and also owes a duty to repair any defects on the property.
The facts indicate that Penelope and her friends went shopping at Deals. This is a business exchange and therefore she is an invitee. Deal[s] owes her a duty of care as mentioned above.
Breach:
A breach is the failure to perform a legal duty.
Res Ipsa Loquitor
"The thing speaks for itself." When an elevator door opens without the elevator present, it can be said that something went wrong and a breach occurred. The elevator was within Deals['] ability to fix and when this accident occurred the court can imply that he failed to inspect the elevator properly and place the burden on him to prove otherwise. Deal[s] has breached his duty of care.
Causation:
-2-

Actual Causation:
This is the sine qua non or - "but for" cause of the accident. "But for" the elevator not being properly maintained, this accident would have never occurred.
Proximate Causation:
This is the direct or indirect act that caused the accident. Penelope will argue that her injury was a direct result from Deals' breach. She'll claim that there were not any intervening, unforeseeable or independent acts.
Deals will argue that Penelope's not looking as she entered was an intervening act since it occurred after his breach and was unforeseeable.
Deals['] act "set the stage" for the accident and was therefore an indirect proximate cause. Penelope's not looking is foreseeable since a blind person shopping at Deals was foreseeable as falling as well.
Deals' breach was an actual and proximate cause of Penelope's injuries.
Damages:
For negligence, economic loss alone is not sufficient. One must suffer physical damages.
The facts indicated that Penelope sustained "minor physical injuries as a result of her fall." These are sufficient damages.
Result:
Deal[s] was negligent and will be liable for general and special damages for Penelope[']s injuries as a result of the fall.
Aggrivated [sic] injuries: thin-skin Plaintiff.
The courts have established that the defendant is liable for even unforeseeable injuries that result due to the plaintiff's pre-existing weaknesses. Deal[s] will be liable for the acute psychotic breakdown that caused her permanent disabilities; even though it was unforeseeable and unpredictable at the time of the accident. Penelope can recover general and special damages for her physical disabilities that resulted due to Deals' negligence.
Penelope v. Reliable Elevator Co. "Reliable" Products Liability - Negligence
-3-

Duty: Manufacturers of products owe a duty of care to provide safe products.
Under common law, Penelope would not be in privity of contract and not have the
ability to sue Reliable.
However, modernly, MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co. established that manufacturers owe a duty of care to the purchaser and any foreseeable end user.
The facts indicate that Reliable "manufactured and installed the elevator." Since they installed and even maintained it inside Deals Department Store, they were directly put on notice that any of Deals' employees or customers were foreseeable users of the product. Penelope as a customer thus has a cause of action since she is owed a duty of care.
Breach:
Res Ipsa Loquitor (supra)
Since Reliable was to maintain the product and it failed to operate correctly, a presumption of a breach can be made. Reliable has breached its duty to Penelope.
Causation: (supra)
Actual cause can be shown since "but for" it not being properly maintained and inspected, the injury would not have occurred.
Proximate cause can be shown since there was no unforeseeable, intervening or independent act that broke the chain of causation.
Damages: (supra)
Penelope has suffered minor physical injuries and a permanent disability.
Reliable will be liable for general and special damages for both due to their negligence.
Due to this not being a newly manufactured good strict liability & warrantee [sic] do not apply since any maintenance to the machine would be an alteration of modification of the product.
? DEFENSES
Penelope v. Deal & Penelope v. Reliable
-4-

Contributory Negligence:
Reliable and Deal[s] will argue that by Penelope stepping backwards into the elevator shaft without looking was her contributory negligence that should eliminate or reduce his [sic] liability.
Under common law, a person had to be 100% not negligent to collect. A person's even 1% contributory negligence barred them from any recovery.
Some courts offer "Last Clear Chance" for plaintiffs to eliminate there [sic] contributory negligence. But here, Penelope is not blind and she had the "Last Clear Chance" to avoid her injury simply by looking where she was going.
Under common law, Penelope would not collect for her injuries form Reliable or Deal[s].
Modernly, courts follow comparative negligence. In strict comparative negligence, Penelope can recover 1% of her damage even if 99% at fault. In other juri[s]dictions, they require that the plaintiff be no greater at fault[,] either 50-50% or 49-51%. Under these jurisdictions, Penelope can collect whatever portion she was not a[t] fault for.
Assumptions of the Risk.
Plaintiff must know and recognize the danger and proceed anyhow.
Here, Penelope's back was turned. It can be assumed that she wouldn't have stepped if she had seen the empty elevator shaft.
Penelope did not assume the risk.
Deal[s] v. Reliable
Deal[s] may attempt to sue Reliable for indemnity.
Deal[s] will claim that since he contracted with Reliable to maintain the elevator that they were responsible to maintain it properly.
Deal[s] will state that he is not responsible as respondeat superior for Reliable since he is not their employer. They can maintain it when they want and can send whatever repairman they want. Thus, they are independent contractors.
Unless Reliable has an indemnity clause in their service contract, Deal[s] can sue them and collect for whatever amount that he had to pay Penelope.
-5-

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
Penelope vs. Deals
Negligence
Penelope will bring an action for negligence against Deals.
Duty - Deals owes a duty to Penelope as a landowner occupier. Deals['] duty is to inspect, warn or make safe any dangerous conditions. This duty is imposed on Deals at this standard because Penelope is considered an invitee. An invitee is one who has consent to enter the landowners['] property and has a pecuniary interest in common with the owner.
Breach - A breach of the duty occurs when the defendant's actions fall below the standard of care owed.
Here the facts tell us that the elevator doors opened without the elevator being present. The defendant['s] failure to inspect the elevator and make it safe breached his duty to Penelope.
Deals could have had ensured by inspecting and placing warning signs to always look before stepping into the elevator.
Causation
The defendant will be liable for an injury if he was both the actual and proximate cause of the injury.
Actual Cause - This test is usually referred to as the "but for" test. It can be said that but for Deals['] failure to inspect or make their premises safe, the injury would not have occurred.
Proximate Cause - This test is usually referred to as the foreseeability test. It is foreseeable that an elevator may[,] for whatever reason, not to [sic] be in position.
Deals will counter that Penelope's act of not looking, before she stepped backwards, is an independent, unforeseeable, intervening act, but this arguement [sic] will fail, because it is foreseeable that a customer will be talking with friends and upon hearing the door open step in without looking.
Deals is therefore the proximate cause of the injuries.
Damages - The plaintiff must actually suffer damages to recover for negligence. This does not appear to be an issue, because the facts tell us she was injured.
Contributory Negligence - As stated as a defense to proximate causation Deals will counter
-7-
??????????
that when Penelope didn't look, before stepping, she contributed to her injury. If this is found to be true she will be barred under a contributory jurisdiction from recovery. A comparative jurisdiction will allow her to recover, with an offset due to [t]he percentage at fault, under a pure[-]comparative. Under a partial comparative, she may recover if she wasn't found more than 50% at fault.
As stated prior this arguement [sic] will fail and Deals will be liable for negligence. It should be noted that Deals may be able to obtain indemnity from Reliable. If one does not find negligence as stated supra, res ipsa loquitor discussed infra can be applied here.
Negligent Infliction of Emotional Distress
The defendant can recover under this theory if she was within the zone of danger, and suffered severe emotional distress.
Since she actually suffered injury due to the negligence, she was in the zone of danger. Also, the facts tell us, she suffered [an] acute psychotic breakdown that is permanent, which will satisfy the element of severe emotional distress and the impact requirement of some jurisdictions.
Deals will counter that he should not be liable because the plaintiff already had a preexisting condition, but this will fail, because you take your plaintiffs as you find them. His attempt to break causation will fail, because he was the actual and proximate as discussed supra.
Deal[s] liable for negligent infliction. Penelope vs. Reliable
Penelope will sue Reliable under a products liability theory.
A manufacturer can be held liable under negligence, warranty and strict liability if their product was defective and caused the injury.
Negligence
A manufacturer is held liable for any injury caused to a foreseeable end user or bystander, due to his negligent design, manufacturing or failure to provid[e] adequate warning.
The case of MacPherson vs. Buick no longer requires privity.
????Res Ipsa Loquitor
?-8-

The facts tell us that this type of accident has never occurred and that there is no evidence of what caused the elevator to be out of position.
When there is no evidence to support a negligent act, res ipsa loquitor is used.
The accident must be of the kind that does not normally occur absent negligence. Here an elevator doesn't fail to reach it's [sic] destination absent some negligence.
Also, the cause of the injury must be in the exclusive control of the defendant. Here Reliable was not only the manufacturer, but also responsible for maintaining the product. It will therefore be deemed to have been in his exclusive control.
Reliable may counter that he was not in exclusive control, because Deals would also be in control. This arguement [sic] will fail because, as stated, Reliable was responsible for maintaining also.
The final element is that the plaintiff did not cause or contribute to the injury. Although Reliable will state that Penelope did cause and contribute to the injury, as discussed in P v. Deals, this arguement [sic] will fail.
Therefore Reliable will be found liable, under res ipsa, but it should be noted that this is just an inference of negligence, to be decided by a jury.
Warranty
A manufacturer's products come with a warranty of merchantability that they will be safe when used for ordinary purposes. Under Henningson vs. Bloomfield, no privity is required.
Here the facts tell us the elevator failed to appear when the door opened. An elevator is suppose[d] to be there, therefore it failed to meet it's [sic] ordinary purpose.
Since it did not appear as discussed infra it was the actual and proximate cause and damages resulted.
Strict Liability
A manufacturer is held strictly liable for any injuries caused to any foreseeable end user or bystander, as a result of a defective product.
Under Elmore vs. American Motors no privity is required.
There are no facts to indicate that there was a design, manufacturing or warning defect.
-9-
????
Question 2
GrainCo, a regional grain distributor, sent an offer to sell ten railroad cars of wheat to Processor. The entire offer is contained on a signed form. The front side of the form contains GrainCo's name and address, along with blank spaces for the description of the goods, quantity, price, and delivery date. The blanks were filled in with the desired information. The following statement appears at the bottom of the front side of the form:
"Any contract resulting from acceptance of this offer shall consist only of those terms appearing on the front and reverse sides of this document."
The reverse side of GrainCo's form has six paragraphs. Paragraph five reads as follows:
"Any disputes arising under this agreement shall be resolved through binding arbitration under the rules of the Commercial Arbitration Association."
Processor responded to GrainCo's offer with its standard acceptance form. Processor's form contains its name, address, and company logo embossed at the top of the page with the words "Purchase Order" just below. It has blank spaces for the description of the goods, quantity, price, and delivery date, which Processor filled in with information matching the information on GrainCo's offer. Processor's Purchase Order form has five paragraphs on the back. Paragraph five states:
"The laws of the State of California shall govern this agreement and any claims or controversies arising during performance shall be resolved through proceedings in the courts of the State of California."
Processor's Purchase Order form has a signature line at the bottom of the front side, but due to a clerical error the form sent to GrainCo was not signed. Soon after receiving Processor's Purchase Order form, GrainCo purchased ten railroad cars of wheat from local suppliers for shipment to Processor.
1. Assume that before any wheat is shipped to Processor, the price of wheat falls sharply. If Processor informs GrainCo that it will not accept the ten railroad cars of wheat, will Processor be liable to GrainCo for breach of contract? Discuss.
2. Assume instead that GrainCo delivers the ten railroad cars of wheat to Processor, and Processor pays to GrainCo the full contract price. If Processor has a complaint about the quality of the wheat it received, must Processor submit its claim to the Commercial Arbitration Association? Discuss.
-11-

2)
GrainCo v. Processor UCC governs
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
???Under contract law, the UCC governs the sale of goods, moveable property identified at contract formation. Here, the contract was for the sale of ten railroad cars of wheat and therefore the contract was for the sale of goods and the UCC applies.
Merchants
Under the UCC, a merchant is one who trades in or otherwise holds himself out as knowledgeable about the goods. Here, GrainCo is a regional grain distributor, and Processor processing the goods. Therefore, both parties are merchants.
Writing required
Under the Statute of Frauds, a writing is required for the sale of goods over $500. Here, if the sale of 10 railroad cars of grain exceeds $500, a writing is required.
Formation
Under contract law, the rights and remedies of the parties depend on whether a valid contract has been formed. A valid contract consists of mutual assent (offer and acceptance) and consideration.
Offer
An offer is a[n] outward manifestation of a present intent to be contractually bound, creating a power of acceptance in the offeree, and containing certain and definite terms. Here[,] GrainCo sent a written offer and the entire agreement was contained on a signed form. Therefore, the form was an outward manifestation with intend[sic] to be bound creating a power of acceptance in the offeree which did in fact create a power of acceptance in the offeree.
At common law, the offer had to contain quantity, time for performance, parties, price, and subject matter. Modernly under the UCC, quantity is sufficient[;] all other terms can be ascertained by course of dealings, course of performance, trade usage or gap fillers. Here, the offer contained goods, quantity, price and delivery date. Since quantity is sufficient, we have certain and definite terms.
????Acceptance
?-12-

Acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. At common law, the acceptance had to be the mirror image of the offer. Under UCC 2-201, additional or different terms may be included unless the offeror expressly limits the contract to the terms in the offer, the offeree objects within 10 days, or the acceptance alters a material term. Here, the offer stated that "any contract resulting from acceptance...shall consist only of those terms appearing on the front and reverse sides of this document". Under the UCC, and since the parties are both merchants, this state expressly limits the terms to the terms of the offeror and hence GrainCo's arbitration clause would prevail. Without the terms clause, any terms that are not the same as the original offer would be knocked out. Processor's acceptance was printed on a standard form and mirrored GrainCo's offer with the exception that Processor's Purchase order also had a controversies paragraph on the back stating that "The law of the State of California shall govern this agreement and any claims or controversies arising during performance shall be resolved through proceedings in the courts of the State of California". Processor's different terms regarding disputes will not become part of the contract since the offeror expressly limited the contract to offeror's terms.
Consideration
Consideration is that which is bargained for and given in exchange for a current exchange. It can be an act, forbearance to act, or return promise resulting in legal benefit or legal detriment. Here, GrainCo's receiving the grain is his legal detriment and Processor receiving the grain is Processor's legal benefit. GrainCo's receipt of money for the grain is his legal benefit and Processor's promise to pay for the grain is Processor's legal detriment. Therefore, we have a valid consideration and a valid contract.
Statute of Frauds Defense
Statute of frauds requires a writing for a contract for the sale of goods for $500 or more. The facts don't state a specific amount. Here, if the contract was for less than $500, no writing is required. Assuming the contract was for more than $500, then a writing is required. Under the UCC, a writing requires a signing by the party to be charged and quantity. Processor'sacceptanceformincludedaquantitytermbutduetoaclericalerror did not contain a signature. The form[,] however, did contain its name, address and company logo on the top of the page with the words "Purchase Order". Courts have held that this is sufficient since it can be implied that there was a meeting of the minds and an acceptance by Processor since their Purchase Order contained the name of the party to be charge [sic], Processor filled out the form and sent it. Additionally, since the lack of signature was a clerical error, courts will tend to allow reformation for a unilateral mistake on behalf of the non-mistaking party. Here, processor's mistake to not sign the form was unilateral so the courts will tend to enforce the contract against the non-mistaking party which is GrainCo. Therefore, the Statue [sic] of Frauds will be no defense and the contract will be enforceable.
-13-
??
If the courts were to allow the status [sic] of frauds as a defense, GrainCo could collect damages from Processor since GrainCo detrimentally relied on Processor's acceptance and purchased 10 carloads of wheat.
Anticipatory repudiation (Question 1)
Anticipatory repudiation occurs when a party communicates that they unequivocally will not perform. Here, the price of wheat fell and Processor informed GrainCo that it would not accept the ten railroad cars of wheat. Under the UCC, the terms of a contract can be modified in for [sic] a good faith reason. Here, both parties assumed the risk of the price of wheat fluctuating. An increase of price is no defense to contract formation. Both parties are merchants and deal in the product and know or should know that there is a probability of price fluctuations. When Processor stated that is[sic] would not accept the wheat, GrainCo has the right to immediately stop performance, mitigate his damages and try to sell the wheat to another party, and sue Processor because Processor has breached his absolute duty. Processor may assert the Statute of Frauds Defense (supra), but will not prevail.
Performance (Question 2)
Under the UCC, a buyer that receives nonconforming goods may reject the shipment, or accept the shipment and collect damages for the difference between the goods if they had been of the quality specified by the contract minus the price of the goods as accepted. A writing[,] however, can specify terms different from the UCC. Here, GrainCo had an arbitration clause that required disputes to be settled through the rules of the Commercial Arbitration Association (see Offer supra). Processor's form indicated resolution through the courts of California. Since GrainCo's form expressly limited the contract to the terms in the original offer[,] Processor must submit its claim to the Commercial Arbitration Associations.
Breach
Failure to perform a duty that has become absolute through satisfaction, excuse or discharge. Here, Processor's duty became absolute upon offer, acceptance and consideration absent any defenses. When Processor antipatorily [sic] repudiated the contract, he breached his duty and is liable to GrainCo for damages consisting of the cost of the contract minus any monies GrainCo would receive from mitigating.
???-14-

Grainco v. Processor
Which law governs?
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
??The sale of goods are governed by Uniform Commercial Code. Here the subject matter is wheat[,] which is a tangible item. Hence UCC will be governing law.
Are Parties Merchants?
Merchants are parties who are regularly engaged in the dealing of a good or who hold themselves out as having special knowledge in the subject matter of the contract.
It appears from the fact that Grainco and Processor are in regular business of dealing in wheat and as such will be considered merchants.
Is there a contract?
In order to find a legally enforceable agreement, there should be certain elements present[:] namely, a valid offer, a valid and timely acceptance and consideration. We will discuss these items one by one as follows:
Offer:
An offer is an outward manifestation of the desire of a party to enter into a contractual relationship. An offer should have three components[,] i.e.
Intent - The party making an offer should demonstrate an intent to enter into a present contractual relationship in such a way that the person to whom such offer is made should reasonably understand that power of acceptance has been bestowed upon them.
Content - The offer should contain essential items of the offer[:] namely identification of the parties, price, subject matter and time of performance.
Communication - Such intent and contents should be clearly communicated to the offeree so as to make a reasonable person understand that an offer has been extended giving him power of acceptance.
In the instant case, we are told that Grainco sent a written offer to sell ten carloads of wheat to Processor. This offer was written on a signed form which identified parties, subject matter quantity, price and delivery date. It clearly communicated an intent to commit should such offer be retur[n]ed with due acceptance by Processor.
Hence we can conclude that there was a valid offer made.
-15-
???
Acceptance:
Acceptance is the clear and unequivocal assent to each and every term of the offer, given by the offeree in the manner & time prescribed by the offer or in absence of such stipulations conveyed in a reasonable manner within a reasonable time or until the offer does not lapse or is not revoked.
Here we see that Processor returned Grainco's offer with their acceptance using their standard acceptance form. The offer had not been revoked up to the time they accepted. The acceptance identified the parties, the price, the subject matter and also stated the terms.
Hence we can conclude that their [sic] was a timely acceptance.
Additiona[l]/Conflicting Terms:
Since the governing law is UCC, "Mirror Image Rule" of common law is not applicable.
UCC allows acceptance in any reasonable form with any additional terms not being fatal to contract formation as long as those additional terms do not fall in one of the following categories:
1. Materially change the contract
2. Make the formation entirely contingent upon the acceptance of the terms of the acceptance
3. Are objected to by the offeror within reaso[n]able time.
Under the UCC, additional terms which do not materially alter the terms of the offere [sic] become part of the contract if not objected to by the offeror. However, the terms which materially alter the terms of the contract are to be expressly consented to by the offeror in order to become part of the contract.
UCC handles conflicting terms in the following manner:
Knock Out Rule: Conflicting terms are self[-]cancelling and the contract is reduced to the terms which are not conflicting each other.
UCC Gap fillers: UCC provide gab [sic] fillers which will replace the conflicting terms with the standard terms provided by UCC.
In the instant case, we see that GrianCo [sic] had made it a condition that the acceptance will be only on the terms printed on their offer/sale form. Paintco's form,
-16-
??
though[,] contained a conflicting terms [sic] concerning issues of dispute which may arise later on, did not stipulate that the formation of contract will be conditional on acceptance of their terms.
However, since there is conflict, a court may find the conflicting terms self[-]cancelling and may insert standard UCC gap fillers.
Consideration:
Consideration is defined as bargained for exchange of legal detriment. In [sic] can be in two forms:
?contract.
1. Promise by each party to do what they were not obligated to do absent the
2. Forbearance to act which they were entitled to act absent the contract.
Here, we see that GrainCo has agreed to supply grain and Processor has agreed to pay the money.
Hence proper consideration is available and is not fatal to contract formation.
Absence of Signature:
The formation of contract is dependent on valid Offer, Acceptance & Consideration as well as parties['] intent to enter into the contract.
Absence of signature will not be fatal to the formation of the contract as long as parties desired to enter into the contract and met the essential elemental requirement to form the contract.
Statutes of Fraud:
Concerning sale of goods contract, if the value of goods is over $500.00, such contract is required to be in writing.
Here we see that parties made the offer and acceptance in writing on their standard stationery. Such stationery clearly identified the parties involved, subject matter of the contract, price, date and place of delivery[,] etc.
Hence we may conclude that the SOF requirement was met.
Anticipatory Repudiation:
While the contract is executory on both sides, i.e.[,] neither party has rendered
-17-
???
performance under the contract, anticipatory repudiation is said to have occurred if one of the parties, unequivocally and clearly express intention that they will not perform their duties, the aggrieve[d] party is faced with anticipatory repudiation.
Here we see that GrainCo has not yet shipped when Processor notified G that they will not pay for the grain. This refusal to pay was due to the changed market conditions. Since G has not yet performed, i.e.[,] they have not yet shipped the grain, we may conclude that the contract is still executory on both sides. Hence, G is not faced with AR from P.
UCC offers following options to the party faced with AR:
1. Consider this a present breach and sue immediately.
2. Wait for the due date and sue if performance not rendered when due. 3. Disregard AR and demand assurances.
G has an option to consider P in breach and sue for damages immediately. His obligations under the contract will be immediately discharged.
Is there a Breach:
Breach occurs when the performance is not rendered when due.
Here, we are faced with the situation of AR per discussion above. If G elects that they will considered [sic] AR as breach, P will be found to have breached his duties.
We are faced with the breach of contract by P.
Defenses by P:
P may try to raise following defenses:
??following:
No Contract Formed:
P may try to establish that there was no contract formed because of the
?1. Purchase Order not signed -
P may argue that since the purchase order required signature and was not signed, there was no contract formed.
This argument will not hold since it was P who failed to singed [sic] and cannot claim the benefit of his own mistake. Moreover, it was clear from P's actions that they had accepted G's offer when P filled out their standard form with what they were offered on G'[s] offer form. Courts look at the intent of the parties. Here the SOF requirements were met and parties clearly intended to enter into a contract.
-18-

This defense will fail.
2. Conflicting Terms:
P may argue that due to conflicting terms in the purchase and sale order, no contract was formed.
Under UCC additional terms do become part of the contract unless they materially change the contract. Such conflicting terms may either be accepted by the offeror and become part of the contract or they may self[-]cancel each other and UCC's standard gap fillers come into play.
This defense will also fail.
3. Impracticability:
P may argue that due to market fluctuation, it is commercially unconscionable to hold him to the agreement he made. It will be commercially fatal for him to purchase the grain at such a high price.
Equitable Estoppel: The courts may use the doctrine of equitable estoppel, where it can be shown that P's acceptance was foreseeable to cause justified reliance by G and it would render G impoveris[h]ed due to the steps he took to fulfil his contractual duties.
We are told that as soon as G received P acceptance form, G purchased the grains. If P now refuses to accept and pay for them, G will be unjustly impoverished and the court may find that the only way injustice can be avoided would be to hold P for the promise he made.
The court may find P in breach and will allow recovery to G.
What can be recovered:
In cases of breach, following interests can be recovered;
Expectation Damages:
Where both parties have not performed, the aggrieved party may be able to recover the benefit of the bargain and may be put in the situation as if the contract would have been carried out.
Here G may be able [to] recover the contract price minus what they save by not having to perform.
-19-
??
Reliance Damages:
Where aggrieved party has partly performed and the other party breached, they may be able to recover the expense incurred and losses sustained by letting other opportunities pass by.
Here G may be able to recove[r] the expenses they incurred and any lost sales due to commitment from P.
Restitution Damages:
It is applicable where agrieved party has fully performed and the other party breaches.
The aggrieved party may be able to recover the full value of his performance not limited by the cost.
Since here, G had not performed when P repudiated, restitution damage will not be applicable.
Processor v. Grainco Additional or Contradictory Terms:
Please see discussion concerning UCC rules on additional or contradictory terms in the offer v. acceptance supra.
In the instant case, we know that G had made it clear that conditions stated on their forms will govern. P sent their own acceptance form which contained contradictory term. From the facts given to us, we see that G never expressly consented to the additional or conflicting term.
A court may rule in following manner:
1. It may consider that the additional or contradictory term did not become part of the contract since it was never expressly consented to. In that case P will have to submit to Commercial Arbitration Association.
2. The court may consider both terms self[-]cancelling and will apply UCC Provision. In that case UCC provision will hold and P may not be bound by the provision in G's form.
-20-
????
Question 3
After drinking heavily, Art and Ben decided that they would rob the local all-night convenience store. They drove Art's truck to the store, entered, and yelled, "This is a stick- up," while brandishing their unloaded pistols. They discovered that the only persons in the store were Mark, who worked at the store, and Fran, a customer. Art became enraged, since he regarded Fran as his steady girlfriend and was jealous that she had been spending time with Mark. Art announced, "We'll chill these lovers out," and loaded them into the truck. Art drove a very short distance down the dirt road behind the store to a large refrigerator. Art locked Fran and Mark in the refrigerator. Art then returned to the store to pick up Ben, who took $250 from the cash register on his way out of the store.
The next day, the store manager saw that things were amiss and called police, who rescued Fran and Mark from the refrigerator. Fran suffered no significant injury, but Mark soon developed pneumonia and died as a result of it several weeks later. The coroner's report showed that Mark had an extraordinary susceptibility to pneumonia and that it was triggered by exposure to the combination of viruses and the intense cold of the refrigerator.
1. What criminal charges, if any, should be brought against Art and Ben? Discuss. 2. What defenses, if any, do Art and Ben have to the criminal charges? Discuss.
-21-

Conspiracy
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3 State v. Art
??An agreement between two or more persons to commit a crime.
Art and Ben decided to rob the local convenience store. This decision, mutually made, constituted an agreement. Art had both the intent to agree at the time the agreement was formed, and also the intent to commit the criminal act, satisfying the mens rea requirement for conspiracy.
Therefore, Art will be guilty of conspiracy. Pinkerton's Rule
Under Pinkerton's rule, a defendant is guilty of all crimes foreseeably carried out in furtherance of the conspiracy. Therefore, though Art did not actually commit a larceny, larceny was a foreseeable crime, given the nature of the conspiracy, and Art will be guilty though he did not actually commit the act.
Attempted Robbery
Attempt is a substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended crime.
Robbery is the taking of personal property by force or threat of force from the person of the victim.
Art, with the specific intent to rob the convenience store, took an unloaded pistol and went to the store, proclaiming that it was a robbery. He will argue that the pistol was unloaded, and that he therefore did not use force; however it will suffice for the threat of force requirement for burglary and the apparent ability test for attempt. Art was apparently able to rob the store. In addition, it was both legally and factually possible to rob the store, and Art was in the process of perpetrating the crime.
Therefore Art will be guilty of attempted robbery.
Assault
Assault is either a substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery, or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of imminent bodily harm.
Art went into the store with a gun, pointing it at the people inside. This constituted a conditional threat, not an imminent threat of battery, and therefore would not constitute
-22-
???
an assault.
However, Art went further than this, loading Mark and Fran in the truck. It is reasonable to infer that both Mark and Fran were placed in apprehension of this battery before it occurred, and in addition, Art committed a substantial step towards perpetration of the intended battery.
Therefore Art will be guilty of assault.
Battery
The unlawful application of force to the person of another.
Art loaded Mark and Fran into the truck. He had no legal authority to do so, and his application of force was therefore unlawful.
Therefore Art will be guilty of battery. Merger
Though Art is guilty of both assault and battery, assault is a lesser included offense to the battery, and therefore the state will only obtain a conviction on one or the other crime.
False Imprisonment
The unlawful confinement of another, within fixed bounds, for any period of time.
The state would bring two counts of false imprisonment against Art. First, he loaded Mark and Fran into the truck. The[y] had no reasonable escape, and were confined against their will without legal authority.
Second, Art placed Mark and Fran into the refrigerator. They could not get out, and were subjected to the cold temperatures until rescued, hours later.
Therefore, Art will be guilty of false imprisonment.
Kidnapping
The intentional confinement and asportation of another.
Art confined Mark and Fran in the back of the truck, as discussed supra. In addition, he drove them down the road.
Art could argue that, because he did not drive them very far, he did not asport Mark and Fran. However, asportation takes merely the slightest movement once the victim has
-23-
????
been confined. Therefore the short drive was sufficient. Therefore Art will be guilty of kidnapping.
Murder
Homicide committed with malice aforethought. Homicide
The killing of a human being by another human being.
Art subjected Mark to the cold of the refrigerator, which led to Mark's death by pneumonia.
Actual Cause
But for the actions for Art, Mark would not have gotten pneumonia and died.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable that placing a person in a refrigerator will result in his sickness, and possibly death.
Art would argue that the susceptibility of Mark to pneumonia constituted an intervening cause that would break the chain of guilt. However, to be sufficient for an intervening cause, the condition cannot be pre-existing. Mark's susceptibility was in existence before being placed in the refrigerator, and is therefore not an intervening cause.
Malice
The prosecution can prove malice in any one of four ways: 1) Intent to kill; 2) Intent to cause serious bodily harm; 3) A depraved heart act; or 4) The felony murder rule. In this case, the prosecution will argue intent to cause serious bodily harm, the depraved heart act, and the felony murder rule.
1. Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Harm. Intent is either desire to bring about a particular result, or knowledge to a substantial degree of certainty that such a result will occur. The prosecution will argue that Art knew that serious bodily harm was likely to occur by placing two people in a refrigerator. Art would argue that the substantial certainty did not rise to the level necessary. A jury would have to decide, but it is likely that a jury would agree with Art.
2. A Depraved Heart Act. The defense would argue that, even if Art's actions did not rise to the level of intent, they were severely reckless in regards to the safety of
-24-
?????
Mark and Fran. The prosecution is likely to succeed in its recklessness contention.
3. The Felony Murder Rule. The prosecution will argue that the death occurred in the perpetration of an inherently dangerous felony. Art and Ben were still in the res gestae of the attempted robbery, having not [sic] reached any place of temporary safety, and Art was also committing the felony of kidnapping. Both robbery and kidnapping are inherently dangerous felonies for the purpose of this rule.
First Degree Murder
Murder premeditated and deliberated with the specific intent to kill, murder by the felony murder rule, or murder by bomb, torture, ambush, or poison.
As discussed supra, the prosecution will argue that this murder was under the felony murder rule. They are likely to succeed in this argument, and therefore this murder will be made murder in the first degree.
Second Degree Murder
All murders not first degree.
If the prosecution is unable to prove that the felony murder rule applies, they will fall back on the depraved heart act requirement, and the murder will be second degree.
Voluntary Manslaughter
Homicide with malice, but with adequate provocation or mistaken justification.
Art will argue that seeing his girlfriend with another guy constituted adequate provocation. To be successful, Art would have to argue four things:
1. He was actually provoked. Art was jealous when he saw his girlfriend with another guy. However, he would have to show that this provocation made him act in the heat of passion, not under calm will. Because he was so enraged, it is likely that Art would be able to prove this point.
2. A reasonable person would have provoked. Art is unlikely to be able to show that a reasonable person would be provoked by seeing a girlfriend in a store with someone that worked at the store. The facts give us no indication that there was any reasonableness to Art's jealousy.
3. He did not cool off. Art acted immediately after he became enraged. He did not cool off.
4. A reasonable person would not have cooled off. Because the actions were immediate, a reasonable person probably would not have cooled off.
-25-
???
Because a reasonable person would probably not have been so enraged as to act in the heat of passion, this murder will not be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Homicide without malice, but with criminal negligence or under the misdemeanor manslaughter rule.
If the prosecution is unable to prove malice, they will fall back on involuntary manslaughter.
Therefore, Art is probably guilty of first degree murder.
Accomplice Liability
The state will also argue that Art acted as an accomplice to Ben's larceny, to be discussed infra. Art acted as a facilitator and aider of Ben's larceny, and will therefore be an accomplice.
Defenses
Voluntary Intoxication
Art had been drinking heavily before the crimes were committed. Because this is voluntary intoxication, it will only serve as a defense if it can negate the mens rea of the crime. Therefore it will not apply at all to battery, being a general intent crime, or to murder under the depraved heart act or felony murder rule, unless it knocks out one of the felonies.
However, Art will argue voluntary intoxication for the remaining strict liability offenses. He will have to show that the intoxication actually overcame his specific intent. Based on the facts, it is not likely that Art would be able to prove this. He was cognizant enough to become jealous and enraged, indicating that he could think in a rational way, despite the drinking.
Therefore this defense will not absolve Art of culpability. Diminished Capacity
In a minority of jurisdictions, the defendant will be acquitted if some action or insane impulse diminished his capacity to reason and think through his actions. Because, as discussed supra, Art was still apparently able to reason cognizantly, this defense will not apply.
Therefore this defense will not absolve Art of culpability.
-26-
?????
Conspiracy
State v. Ben
??Defined supra.
Ben entered the same agreement discussed supra, with the requisite intent. Therefore Ben is guilty of conspiracy.
Pinkerton's Rule
Ben did not actually commit the crimes of kidnapping or false imprisonment. However, these crimes are all reasonably foreseeable in perpetration of a conspiracy to commit robbery, and Ben will therefore be guilty of them.
Robbery
Defined supra.
Ben entered the store waving a gun and demanding money. However, he did not actually take the money until Mark and Fran had been locked in the refrigerator. To constitute robbery, the taking must be from the person of the victim, which was not the case here.
The state could argue that, because the victims were forcibly removed from the scene of the crime, there was a constructive taking from the person of the victim. However, the state is not likely to succeed in this argument, because the taking and the victim were so far removed.
Therefore Ben is not guilty of robbery.
Attempted Robbery
Defined supra.
Ben, in participating in the same actions as Art did, will be guilty of this crime in the same way. The discussion, supra, is applicable here.
Therefore Ben is guilty of attempted robbery.
???Larceny
?-27-

The trespassory taking of the personal property of another, with specific intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
Ben grabbed money on the way out, intending to keep it permanently. He had no claim of right to the money, and his taking was therefore trespassory.
Therefore Ben is guilty of larceny.
Mispris[i]on
Failure to report the known felonious conduct of another.
While Art was out kidnapping Mark and Fran on his trip to the refrigerator, Ben was left alone in the store. He knew of the felonious conduct of Art, and did not report it.
Therefore Ben is guilty of mispris[i]on.
Murder
Homicide
Defined supra.
Actual and proximate cause discussed supra. Malice
Defined supra.
The prosecution will argue the felony murder rule against Ben. The murder of Mark, as discussed supra, occurred in the commission of an inherently dangerous felony. Under the felony murder rule, all co-felons are equally guilty. Ben was a co-felon in the attempted robbery and an accomplice to the kidnapping, and therefore the prosecution will be able to show malice.
First Degree Murder Defined supra.
This murder will be first degree, as based on the felony murder rule. Therefore Ben will be guilty of first degree murder.
Accomplice Liability
Though Ben did not actually commit the crimes of kidnapping and false
-28-
??????
imprisonment, he was an accessory to them as a co-felon. He will therefore be held to be guilty of these crimes.
Defenses
Ben will argue the same defenses to his crimes as Art would. It is likely that his defenses would fail, because he seems to be acting in full awareness of what he is doing.
?-29-

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
Question 1
State v. Art (A) and Ben (B)
Conspiracy to commit robbery
Conspiracy is an agreement b/n 2 or more people to commit an unlawful act.
At common law, conspiracy is complete upon agreement. Here, there is an agreement b/n A and B, as facts show A and B decided to rob the local store. As such, there is a conspiracy at common law.
Modernly, a conspiracy is shown through an overt act. Here, A and B entered the store and yelled "This is a stick up" with pistols, which is an overt act. As such, there is conspiracy modernly.
Pinkerton rule
Under the Pinkerton rule, a coconspirator is liable for the acts of the other that are foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy. As such, A and B would be liable for the acts of the other that are foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy to commit robbery.
Burglary of store
At common law, burglary is the trespassory breaking and entering of a dwelling house at nighttime with the intent to commit a felony therein.
The state will not find a common law burglary, b/c there was no breaking by A and B, as facts state the all-night store was open for business, and there is no dwelling house, since it was a convenience store.
Modern burglary
Instead, the state will show there was modern burglary, which does not include a breaking, dwelling house, nighttime, or felony.
Here, there was a trespassory entry by A and B, since they did not have the consent of the store's owner to rob the store, and the facts state they entered the store. There was a structure, as a store is deemed to be a structure. There was the intent to commit a crime, robbery.
As such, A and B are guilty of modern burglary.
-30-
??????
State v. A
Kidnapping/re: Fran (F) and Mark (M)
Kidnappingisfalseimprisonmentwithmovement. (Falseimprisonmentistheconfinement of a person by another with the victim's consent).
There was a confinement by A, of F and M, without their consent, as facts state he locked them in a refrigerator and the facts do not show he had their consent to do so. The confinement of F and M was with movement, as facts show he moved them from the store into his truck.
As such, A is guilty of kidnapping.
Pinkerton/B's liability
Since the act of kidnapping was not foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy to rob, as facts show A was jealous of F and M and decided to kidnap them, B will not be liable for F's act under Pinkerton.
Battery of F and M
Battery is the harmful or offensive touching to the person of another.
Since the facts state A loaded F and M into his truck, there is an offensive touching by A.
A is guilty of battery.
Pinkerton/B's liability
Since the act of A's battery was not foreseeable and not in furtherance of the conspiracy to rob, B will not guilty [sic] of A's act under Pinkerton.
Homicide of M
Homicide is the killing of one person by another. Here, there is a killing of M, since the facts show he died from being locked in the refrigerator by A. However, there may be an issue as to causation since it is not clear whether M was killed by being locked in the refrigerator or due to his susceptibility to pneumonia.
??????Actual cause
?-31-

But for A locking M in the refrigerator, M would not have died. A is the actual cause of M's death.
Proximate cause
A foreseeable consequence of A's locking M in the refrigerator is that M would die. Intervening act
A will assert there was the intervening act of M's susceptibility to the pneumonia.
However, M's susceptibility to pneumonia would be considered foreseeable and not superseding, since a person's condition of susceptibility to certain things is foreseeable. As such, A is the proximate cause of M's death.
Murder/2nd degree murder of M
The state's best charge against A is to charge him with 2nd degree murder of M. The felony murder rule will not attach here, since the killing of M was not independent of the inherently dangerous felony, kidnapping, as facts state A was upset at M and F and decided to "chill these lovers out".
Murder is homicide plus malice aforethought.
The state will show malice aforethought through the following:
Intent to kill/Intent to cause serious bodily harm
The state will argue that A had the intent to kill, as facts state he stated "We'll chill these lovers out" and proceeded to lock M in the refrigerator, and left him in there for good.
However, A will counter argue that he did not have the intent to kill, since he locked M in a refrigerator, which is not as cold or deadly as a freezerm [sic], and he merely was upset at F and M and decided to lock them up.
The state will rebut and state that even if A did not manifest an intent to kill, then certainly locking a person inside a refrigerator, with no breathing holes, and intense cold temperatures manifests an intent to cause serious bodily harm.
Thus, more facts are needed to ascertain whether A had an intent to kill, and the state will show A's intent to cause serious bodily harm.
????Wanton and reckless
?-32-

Wanton and reckless is an extreme indifference to the value of human life. Locking a human inside a confined space such as refrigerator [sic] with no way of getting out exhibits an extreme indifference to the value of human life. As such, A was wanton and reckless.
Thus, the state will find A guilty of 2nd degree murder of M.
Voluntary manslaughter/sudden heat of passion
The defense will mitigate A's 2nd degree murder charge down to voluntary manslaughter via sudden heat of passion.
Sudden heat of passion
The state will show the following:
The defendant acted from passion rather than reason, as facts state A was upset that F, as his steady girlfriend, had been spending time with M, and saw M and F together at the store, when he became enraged and locked them in the refrigerator.
A reasonable person would act from passion rather than reason, as a reasonable person would become enraged if his girlfriend was caught spending time with another man, and that man was someone the person was already suspicious about in the first place.
There was no cooling off time b/n the passion and the killing, as facts state A became enraged upon seeing F and M together and proceeded to kidnap and lock them in the refrigerator.
As such, the state will successfully mitigate down to voluntary manslaughter via sudden heat of passion.
A is guilty of voluntary manslaughter.
Pinkerton/B's liability
Since the act of A's killing of M was not foreseeable and not in furtherance of the conspiracy, B is not guilty of voluntary manslaughter of M.
Attempted murder of F
Specific intent
At issue here is whether A had the specific intent to kill, as facts do not demonstrate A wanted to kill F. However, locking one in refrigerator [sic] under cold temperatures would manifest an intent to kill.
-33-
?????
A had the apparent ability to kill, as facts state A locked F inside the refrigerator. A was dangerously close to perpetration, as opposed to preparation state, as facts state F was locked inside by A[.] It was only factually impossible as opposed to legally impossible for A to kill F, since F was rescued the next day but would have died if she were not rescued.
As such, A is guilty of attempted murder.
Pinkerton/B's liability
Since the act of A's attempted murder was not foreseeable and not in furtherance, B is not guilty of attempted murder under Pinkerton.
State v. B
Robbery of store/$250
Robbery is larceny plus force or intimidation.
There was force/intimidation, as facts state B bran[d]ished a pistol while yelling "This is a stick up".
Larceny is a trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with the intent to deprive permanently.
There was a tresspassory taking and carrying away, as facts state B took and carried away $250 without the consent of store's owner. The money was the personal property of another, since the facts state it was in the cash register and belonged to the store. B had the intent to deprive permanently, as facts state he left the store w/the money, thus depriving the store of the money permanently.
As such, B is guilty of robbery.
Pinkerton/A's liability
Since the act of B's robbery was foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy to commit robbery, A will be guilty of robbery.
????Question 2
Defense by A and B
??-34-

The only defense available to criminal charges of A and B is to assert intoxication, b/c it negates the requisite specific intent.
Intoxication
A and B will argue that they should be acquitted of the abovementioned crimes (except A's battery charge), since they are all specific intent crimes. A and B will assert that they were heavily intoxicated and could not form the specific intent to commit these crimes, as facts state they committed these crimes after drinking heavily.
However, the state will argue that A and B were not intoxicated to the point that they could not form the requisite specific intent to commit these crimes, since the facts show A and B were still able to drive to the store to rob it and get away, and A was able to drive the truck to another location during the robbery to confine F and M in a refrigerator.
As such, A and B's intoxication defense fails and A and B will be charged with the abovementioned crimes.
?-35-

Question 4
Carol stopped her car at the entrance to her office building to get some papers from her office. She left her car unlocked and left the ignition key under the car's front floor mat while she went briefly into her office.
While Carol was gone, Peter entered Carol's car, found the ignition key where he had seen her leave it, and started the car, intending to drive it to the hospital where his spouse had just been taken for emergency treatment. After Peter had driven the car for about a block, the brakes failed, the car hit a tree, and Peter was injured. In a dazed condition from the accident, Peter entered a nearby public building and pulled the lever of an emergency fire alarm. A city fire truck, responding to the alarm, hit and seriously injured Carol as she was emerging from her office building.
What claims, if any, do Carol and Peter have against each other, and what defenses, if any, may each assert? Discuss.
-36-

4)
PETER v. CAROL
1) ISSUE - NEGLIGENCE?
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
??Under tort law, negligence is a failure to exercise the degree of car[e] a reasonable person would have exercised in the same situation. A prima facie case of negligence requires a showing of 1) duty, 2) breach, 3) actual cause, 4) proximate cause, and 5) damages.
DUTY
Every person is under a duty to act as a reasonable person and not expose others to an unreasonable risk of harm.
Here, Carol had a duty to keep her brakes maintained in proper working order to protect her fellow drivers and pedestrians from an unreasonable risk of harm. Furthermore, she had a duty not to expose her dangerous car to others by properly securing it when she left it unattended.
Therefore, Carol owes a duty to Peter. BREACH
A breach is a failure to exercise the degree of due care which a reasonable person would have exercised in the same situation.
Here, Carol breached her duty of due care when she left her car unlocked and keys under the floor mat because anyone could get in her car with poorly maintained breaks [sic].
Therefore, she breached her duty to secure her car.
RES IPSA LOQUITOR
Under res ipsa loquitor an inference of negligence is raised when 1) the injury would not have occurred absent negligence, 2) the defendant was in exclusive control over the instrumentality causing the injury, and 3) the plaintiff did not contribute to his own injury.
Here, 1) brakes do not fail unless someone is negligent in their maintenance and 2) Carol was in exclusive control of her car and its maintenance. However, Peter did contribute to his own injury by jumping into Carol's car with no knowledge of its safety.
Therefore, Peter will not be able to use res ipsa.
-37-
??
ACTUAL CAUSE
A defendant's act is the actual cause of the plaintiff[']s injury if it would not have occurred but for the defendant's act.
Here, but for Carol leaving her car unlocked and keys under the floor mat Peter would not have been injured.
Therefore, Carol is the actual cause of the Peter's [sic] harm.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause means that the plaintiff[']s injury is a direct and natural result of the defendant[']s act, uninterrupted by unforeseeable intervening act. That [sic] the law will hold the defendant liable for the harm.
Here, it was foreseeable that someone like Peter would drive away in Carol's car after seeing her leave her keys under the floor mat and door unlocked.
Therefore, Carol is the proximate cause of Peter's injuries.
DAMAGES
Here, Peter was injured when he hit a nearby tree.
Carol will be liable for his general damages, pain and suffering[,] as well as his special damages such as medical bills, and lost wages.
2) ISSUE - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE?
Conduct of the plaintiff falling below the standard of care for which she is required to conform for her own protection which will bar the plaintiff's recovery.
Here, Peter driving away Carol's car without her consent was unreasonable conduct which fell below the standard of care which she is required to conform for her own protection.
Therefore, Peter will be barred from recovery. 3) ISSUE - COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE?
Under comparative negligence a plaintiff's recovery will be diminished the amount which his own negligence contributed to the injury.
Here, Peter contributed to his own injuries by driving away Carol's car without her consent.
-38-
?????
A court will determine how much his own negligence should diminish his recovery.
Therefore, Peter's recovery will be diminished.
4) ISSUE - ASSUMPTION OF RISK?
When a defendant knows of and appreciates a risk and voluntarily encounters it he may be barred from a recovery.
Here, Carol will argue that Peter knew her car might not be in a safe condition when he voluntarily encountered the risk by driving it away without her consent. However, reasonable people do not cars [sic] to have faulty breaks [sic] and therefore Peter did not know of the risk.
Therefore, this defense will not be successful.
CAROL v. PETER
5) ISSUE - TRESPASS TO CHATTEL?
A trespass to chattel is an intentional interference with the chattel of another without consent or privilege. An act is intentional if done out of a desire or with knowledge of substantial certainty that the result will occur.
Here, Peter acted [sic] intentionally interfered with Carol[']s chattel when he started Carol[']s car and drove it away because he intended to drive it to the hospital. Furthermore, he did not have Carol[']s consent or privilege (infra).
Therefore, Peter is liable to Carol for trespass to chattel and is liable for the cost of repair and reasonable rental value.
6) ISSUE - CONVERSION?
Under tort law, conversion is the exercise of dominion and control over the chattel of another causing a substantial interference with the chattel that the defendant will be forced to pay the full market value of the chattel, a forced sale.
Here, Peter intentionally interfered with Carol[']s chattel as discussed supra. Further he exercised dominion and control by driving the car. If a court finds that the interference was substantial he may be liable under this tort.
Therefore, Peter may be liable for conversion. 7) ISSUE - NECESSITY?
-39-
?????
A defendant may be privileged to reasonably interfere with the property rights of another if acting due to an imminent threat and to protect his person or property. However, he is liable for all damage cause[d] due to his interference.
Here, Peter will argue that he was privileged to take Carol's car because he was reasonably acting to protect his wife. This argument will fail because there was no imminent threat to himself or his property which could be mitigated by him taking a car and driving to the hospital.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
8) ISSUE - NEGLIGENCE?
Under tort law, negligence is a failure to exercise the degree of car[e] a reasonable person would have exercised in the same situation. A prima facie case of negligence requires a showing of 1) duty, 2) breach, 3) actual cause, 4) proximate cause, and 5) damages.
DUTY
Every person is under a duty to act as a reasonable person and not expose others to an unreasonable risk of harm. Under Palsgraf, Cardozo held that a defendant who creates peril owes a duty to the people who could reasonably be foreseen as being harmed by the peril, the zone of danger.
Here, Peter had a duty to act reasonably in seeking medical attention for his injuries and not creating peril for others in the process.
Therefore, Peter owes a duty to Carol. BREACH
A breach is a failure to exercise the degree of due care which a reasonable person would have exercised in the same situation.
Here, Peter breached his duty when he pulled "the lever of an emergency fire alarm", because this caused the city fire truck to respond to the alarm[,] thereby endangering the safety of the fireman, pedestrians and drivers.
Therefore, Peter breached his duty. ACTUAL CAUSE
A defendant's act is the actual cause of the plaintiff[']s injury if it would not have occurred but for the defendant's act.
-40-
????
Here, but for Peter pulling the emergency fire alarm Carol would not have been injured. Therefore, Peter is the actual cause of Carol's harm.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause means that the plaintiff[']s injury is a direct and natural result of the defendant[']s act, uninterrupted by unforeseeable intervening act. That [sic] the law will hold the defendant liable for the harm.
Here, it was foreseeable that a pedestrian, such as Carol, would be injured by the peril created by Peter's negligent act.
Therefore, Peter is the proximate cause of Carol's.
DAMAGES
Here, Carol was seriously injured.
Peter will be liable for Carol's general damages, pain and suffering as well as her special damages such as medical bills, and lost wages.
2) ISSUE - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE?
Conduct of the plaintiff falling below the standard of care for which she is required to conform for her own protection which will bar the plaintiff's recovery.
Here, Peter will argue that it [sic] Carol[']s own negligence[,] discussed supra [,] was a contributing factor to her own injury. However, the link between Carol's negligence and her own injuries is extremely attenuated.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
3) ISSUE - COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE?
Under comparative negligence a plaintiff's recovery will be diminished the amount which his own negligence contributed to the injury.
Here, Peter will argue that it [sic] Carol[']s own negligence[,] discussed supra [,] was a contributing factor to her own injury. However, the link between Carol's negligence and her own injuries is extremely attenuated.
Therefore, Carol's recovery will not be diminished.
-41-
????
Carol v. Peter
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
?Carol may assert a negligence claim against Peter.
Negligence is conduct which falls below the relevant standard of care established by law for the protection of others against unreasonable risks of harm.
To prove a prima facie case of negligence the plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of evidence that the defendant 1) owed a duty to the plaintiff 2) breached that duty 3) is the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries and 4) the injuries resulted in damages.
Duty?
Duty is the standard of care to act as a reasonably prudent person under same or similar like [sic] circumstances to all for[e]seeable plaintiffs.
Peter was under an emergency to try and get to his wife who was receiving emergency treatment. Peter will be held to such a standard and the jury will decide what is reasonable under these circumstances[.]
Yet, Peter owes a duty to Carol to act reasonable and not cause her any unreasonable risks of harm.
Breach
Breach of duty occurs when the defendant[']s conduct falls below the established standard of care.
Here, if it was found that Peter should have used caution and not wrecked into a tree then he may have breached a duty to Carol.
Causation?
Actual cause is found when the defendant's breach is the direct cause or the substantial factor of the plaintiff's injuries. Proximate cause is found when there are no unfor[e]seeable superceding intervening acts which will cut off liability.
Here it was the fire truck which directly hit and injured Carol. Still as Peter's accident and pulling of the alarm is the reason [sic] they were on the scene Peter is the substantial factor.
Also, it is for[e]seeable that when one is in an accident and you pull an alarm that
-42-
????
someone will come to rescue, the fire truck[']s presence is for[e]seeable. Still, it is questionable whether the court will actually find the fact that Carol emerging out of her office resulting in being hit under Peter's for[e]seeable injures (caused by Peter). This may be far too remote and the court will cut off liability under proximate cause.
Damages
General damages may be awarded if the injury resulted in past present future medical bills, lost wages[,] etc.
Carol was injured by the truck seriously[sic], and if the court does not cut off liability under proximate cause then she may recover general damages.
Trespass to Chattel?
Trespass to chattel is when one intentionally interferes with the possessory rights of another over their personal property.
As Peter intended to take Carol's car which she rightfully possessed and he did not gain her consent, he will be liable for the harm incurred by such interference.
Conversion
Conversion is when one intentionally places dominion and control over the personal property which substantially interferes with the possessor[']s ownership.
Here, Peter took Carol's car and wrecked it. He will be held responsible for the harm to the car under trespass to chattel, yet if the car is no longer useable he may be liable for the amount of the full car.
Defenses Negligence
Contributory and comparative negligence is when the plaintiff's conduct falls below the standard of conduct which one is expected to conform to for his own safety and is a contributing cause to the defendant[']s negligence in bringing about the plaintiff's harm.
Contributory negligence at common law was a total bar to a plaintiff[']s recovery. Comparative, under pure comparative jurisdictions, award damages only if contribution was less than 50% and under all comparative jurisdictions the damages are based on percentages.
Peter will assert the defense that Carol was negligent as to the defective breaks [sic], leaving her keys in the car and emerging out of the office without looking. Discussed more infra...
-43-
?????
Carol's damages will be completely barred under contributory negligence and may be deemed as a high percentage as to contribution to her own harm and will be more than 50%, therefore only under comparative negligence she may be awarded any damages, if at all.
Trespass to Chattel and Conversion Necessity
Necessity may be a defense to intentional torts but if it is a private necessity the defendant must pay for any harm done to the property, and cannot have been the factor placing him in the circumstance.
Here, Peter's wife was in emergency treatment and Peter may claim he used the car out of the necessity to get to her. He will however be liable for the damages to the car.
Peter v. Carol
Peter may assert a claim against Carol in negligence. Defined supra...
Duty supra...
Carol owed a duty to the public to not leave her keys in the car. As this was not the cause of Peter[']s harm this action, conduct will not help Peter's claim.
Still, Carol owes a duty to warn of her deficient breaks [sic] to potential users. As she failed to do so, coupled with the fact of leaving keys in the car she owed a duty to Peter to warn of the bad breaks [sic].
Breach
Defined supra...
When Carol failed to act reasonably and leave her keys in the car knowing her breaks [sic] were bad and that someone may use the car (since it was unlocked) she breached her duty owed to Peter.
Causation?
Defined supra...
The failure of the breaks [sic] were the direct cause of Peter's injuries, and if Carol had not left the door unlocked and keys in the car, or warned (or fixed) of the bad breaks [sic] Peter would not have been hurt. Therefore Carol was a substantial factor.
It is also for[e]seeable that someone will use the car with bad breaks [sic] if the keys are left in it (possible for[e]seeable criminal activity) and Carol is the proximate cause.
Carol may argue that Peter's conduct was an intervening act, still as stated above it was for[e]seeable and Carol is the cause of Peter's injuries.
-44-
?????
Damages
Supra...
Peter may be awarded damages for his injuries resulting from the accident, and delay by the fire truck hitting Carol.
Defenses
Contributing and Comparative Supra...
As Peter was negligent above under contributory he is completely barred and under comparative he may, less likely, be awarded a small percentage.
????-45-


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2004
California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2004 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2004 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question
1. 2. 3. 4.
Number
Subject Page
Criminal Law 1 Contracts 9 Torts 19 Criminal Law 28
??-i-

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?-ii-

Question 1
Al went to Dan's gun shop to purchase a handgun and ammunition. Dan showed Al several pistols. Al selected the one he wanted and handed Dan five $100 bills to pay for it. Dan put the unloaded pistol and a box of ammunition in a bag and placed it on the counter.
While Al was filling out the necessary registration papers, Dan went to the cash register to make change. As he was doing so, Dan noticed that the bills Al had handed him were counterfeit, and he exclaimed, "You rotten bum! You've given me phony money."
At that moment, Al grabbed the bag that had the gun and ammunition in it and fled from the gun shop. Dan grabbed a loaded pistol he kept under the counter and ran after Al, yelling at him to stop. As Dan pursued Al down the street, he fired a shot into the air, and yelled, "If you don't stop, the next shot will stop you." Al kept running, and, as he did so, he loaded a cartridge into the pistol he had fled the gun shop with, turned, and shot toward Dan. The bullet struck and killed Dan.
1. What legal justification, if any, did Dan have (a) pursuing Al, and (b) threatening Al with deadly force? Discuss.
2. With what crimes can Al be charged, and what defenses, if any, can he assert? Discuss
-1-

Answer A to Question 1
?Larceny
?Larceny is the intentional taking and carrying away the property of another with the intent to permanently deprive thereof. Al took possession of the gun and ammunition under false pretenses, i.e. by giving fraudulent money (counterfeit) to Dan. Al therefore obtained possession of the gun and ammunition unlawfully, such that the taking and carrying away was of the property of Dan[.] Dan was justified in his pursuit of Al in that he was legally the owner of the property that Al took, and a person is legally entitled to retrieve property that is rightfully theirs. The retrieval of the property must be immediate for it to be justifiable to use force (lawful) to retrieve. Dan was in hot pursuit of Al, as Al had just taken the goods from his store.
Dan was therefore justified in pursuing Al, as the lapse of time between the asportation of the goods, and Dan's discovery of the good's missing, was almost immediate. A person is entitled to use reasonable force necessary to retrieve stolen goods, if they are in hot pursuit, i.e. immediate pursuit of the stolen items.
Therefore, although deadly force is never allowed in the defense or retrieval of property, if the owner of the property is in hot pursuit of the property, reasonable force may be used to retrieve the property. It was reasonably foreseeable that Dan would run after Al to retrieve his stolen property as the occurrence of the taking was immediate. It could be argued that the firing of a shot into the air was not the use of reasonable force a person is lawfully entitled to use to retrieve their property. Dan, however, could argue that as he was in hot pursuit of his property it was "reasonable" force to fire the pistol in the air, in order to scare the felon, Al, into stopping in his tracks. Dan could argue that his words were reasonable given the immediacy of the situation and his right to retrieve his property. Al could counter that because deadly force is never justified in the retrieval of property, the fact that Dan fired a shot in the air and stated the words "If you don't stop, the next shot will stop you" there was more than the use of reasonably[sic] force used by Dan, because he (Dan) had the apparent ability to carry out his threat.
Assault is the apprehension of an immediate battery. Al could argue that Dan was not justified in his pursuit as the assault was coupled with words and the present ability to carry out the use of deadly force[.] Dan could counter (if he were alive) that he was justified in pursuing Al with deadly force. A civilian is privileged to make a lawful arrest of a felon. Their belief that a felony is being committed must be reasonable. In this case, Dan knew that Al had committed a felony. Al had given him counterfeit bills, and had obtained possession by trick.
Larceny by trick is when a person obtains property possession by deceit. In this case, title did not pass because Al took possession of the gun, knowing that the money he paid for it was counterfeit. Title did not pass, as Dan discovered the counterfeit before he gave the
-2-
??
gun & ammo to Al. But he intend[ed] to pass title, so it could be inferred that Al committed the crime of false pretenses. Because Al had committed a felony, false pretenses, Dan could justifiably arrest him, because he reasonably believed Al had committed a felony, by obtaining property under false pretenses - the gun was not fully registered to him, which would have been title, because it does not appear that Al completed the paperwork. Had the transaction been complete & then Dan found out the money was counterfeit - it would have been larceny by trick, in which title would have passed.
A felony has been committed, and a civilian's entitled to use force necessary to arrest the felon, but it must be reasonable. Dan, again, could argue that it was reasonable to fire a gun & yell at Al, as Al had stolen a gun & ammunition, & was therefore armed & dangerous. However, the gun was not loaded, therefore, deadly force which Dan could be found guilty of applying, if the words he used, coupled with the firing of the shot, were found to be an immediate threat of deadly force capable of being performed which may not have been justified given the fact that Al was fleeing and therefore the force that could be reasonably used to stop a fleeing felon was not justifiable to be deadly force. The gun Al carried was not loaded, and he was fleeing from Dan. Dan[,] it could be argued, could have reasonably believed that Al loaded the gun & he was using reasonable force to stop a dangerous fleeing felon - who had committed an inherently dangerous felony - theft of a firearm and ammunition.
A shopkeeper is entitled legally to detain a customer they believe is unlawfully attempting to steal from them. Dan could argue successfully here, it was within his rights to lawfully detain Al for a reasonable time to question him, as he reasonably believed the money was counterfeit.
II. Al can be charged with obtaining property by false pretenses. False pretenses is obtaining title of the property by the use of deceit. It is a specific intent crime. Here, it can be inferred that Al intentional[ly] gave Dan 5 $100 bills that were counterfeit. Al could have argued that he did not know the bills were counterfeit, however, he took the gun & ammo & ran, therefore, it can reasonably be inferred that Al knew the bills were no good. On the other hand, Al could argue that he did not know the money was bad & when Dan yelled at him "You rotten bum". . . . "Al got terrified & fled from the shop. Al could argue that he was registering the gun, which indicated that he intended to lawfully obtain title to the gun. However, it could be argued that a reasonable person would not have run, however, nonetheless, Al may have personal reasons for his reaction to Dan. This theory may be found to be a bit reaching, but could be arguably used to find Al lacked the requisite specific intent necessary to be found guilty of the specific intent crime of false pretenses. A crime require[s] mens reas [sic] & actus reas [sic]. The mental state is necessary, along with an act - physical move.
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away the property of another with the intent to permanently deprive thereof. It could be argued that Al intended to take the gun and ammo - there is an asportation (required for larceny) as Al moved the gun & ammo. [A]ny
-3-

movement of the property is sufficient to meet the requirement of asportation. Here there was a lot of movement as Al hot[-]tailed it out of the gun shop. Larceny is a specific intent crime; the actor must intend to deprive the owner of the property. Al could argue that he took the gun & ammo "at that moment" that Dan yelled at him regarding the $ counterfeit [sic]. Al could argue that he was shocked by Dan's accusation & fearful of Dan because Dan did own a gun shop & more than likely possessed a loaded pistol. Al could argue that because he thought the money was legitimate, and perhaps Dan was acting unreasonably, that he was fearful of his life & believing that he lawfully purchased the gun & ammo - took his property & left Dan's shop. Title had not passed, only possession however, as the requisite paperwork - registration papers had not been filled out fully. Therefore Al obtained property possession[,] not title. If he is found to have intentionally passed counterfeit bills to Dan, he may be found guilty of larceny by trick - unlawfully obtaining property by the use of deceit.
If Al argues against the larceny charges successfully, he could be successful in establishing that it was his property. However, as stated earlier, a shopkeeper is entitled to lawfully detain a customer if he reasonably believes the customer is attempting to defraud him. Al could be found guilty of larceny based on violation of this law[.] Al could argue that the property he took, he believed, was (reasonably) his. It could be argued against Al, that continuing to run is unnecessary & unreasonable due to the fact that Dan had only said "You rotten bum - you've given me phony money" - Al could counter that he knew Dan had grabbed a gun & that he was afraid for his life & so he ran from Dan, when [D]an fired the shot & yelled that the next shot will stop him, the immediacy of the potential for Dan to carry out his threat was imminent, therefore, Al could argue that in self-defense he loaded the cartridge & shot toward Dan. Al could argue that a person is lawfully entitled to use that force which is necessary to defend oneself against an aggressor & deadly force if it is reasonable to believe it is necessary in self[-]defense - is justified. Al could argue that he believed Dan was crazy & going to kill him & that he was acting in self[-]defense. The state could argue that Dan was the victim of a felony - that under the doctrine of felony murder (a death that occurs during the commission of a felony, the defendant is found guilty of murder) - and hold Al liable for his death. The felony has to be one that is not inherently dangerous, and is separate from the death. Al, it could be argued, did go to Dan's shop with the specific intent of taking the gun & ammo by deceit & obtaining title (false pretenses)[,] therefore in the commission of this felony he would be liable for any deaths resulting thereof. Dan was killed - he was a victim. If Al cannot prove that Dan was a threat to him, Al may be found guilty of felony murder[.] If Al is not found guilty of larceny he could be found guilty of murder. Murder is the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought - reckless, wanton, an[d] malignant heart. If could be argued that firing a shot at anyone who was not an immediate threat to one - in this case Dan had not yet fired at Al - therefore, Al's firing a shot toward Dan, it would be reasonably foreseeable that the bullet would hit Dan & Al's recklessness may be grounds for successful charges of murder. The state could try to also argue that Al specifically intended to kill Dan, in that he premeditated the killing - he had time to think & to load the gun. Al could counter that he was acting in self-defense, and was reasonably justified to use that force he believed
-4-

was necessary under the circumstances to defend himself. This could mitigate the charge to voluntary manslaughter acting in the heat of passion, or to involuntary manslaughter - reckless conduct likely to cause death - or reckless disregard of consequences. If it can be found Al acted with specific intent to deprive Dan of property, he may be found guilty of felony murder. If not, then he may be justified in using a self-defense justification to mitigate his charges to manslaughter or to dismiss his charges.
-5-

Answer B to Question 1
I. - Dan - Justification of Actions
A. Pursuing Al - Dan[']s justification(s) for pursing Al require review of the relationship and standards for Dan[.]
1.) Shopkeeper - Dan as a shopkeeper has a valid use of reasonable force and detention of Al if Dan reasonably believed that Al had stolen goods from the store. The fact that Al grabbed the bag and fled the store when he was confronted about the counterfeit money makes this a reasonable assumption[.]
2.) Owner - Recovery of personal property - Regardless of shopkeeper rule, Dan had the right to timely use reasonable force to recover his personal property which had been stolen by Al. He had the right to pursue Al a reasonable distance in this recovery pursuit.
A. Chasing with a loaded gun - Dan would need to show that taking a loaded gun in his pursuit was a reasonable action. The fact that - Al had stolen a gun and the ammunition may not be sufficient for this showing. The gun was not loaded and this could be a turning point as to reasonableness[.]
3.) Felony Prevention - If Al's action was to be considered a felony, then Dan could act as private citizen [sic] acting to prevent the commission of a felony as well as the two other standards.
4.) Greater Evil - If Al can show that his actions were reasonably necessary to prevent the greater evil that Dan presented with the stolen gun & ammo, then his actions would also be justified[.]
II. Dan - Use of Threat of Deadly Force
?????A. -
Reasonableness -
1.) Did Dan have reason to believe the use of threat of deadly force was reasonable? If Al's stealing the gun & ammunition gave rise to a felony situation & Dan reasonably believed such threat of force was necessary then he should be justified in using this threat[.]
2.) Danger to Others - It may also be argued against Dan that his firing in the air was reckless and unjustified in the threat of danger to
-6-
??
others.
B.) Felony - (see I a 3)
III. Crimes of Al
Use of threat of deadly force would be justified if reasonable to prevent felony.
A.) Murder - For Al to be charged with murder he must be found to have committed a homicide with malice.
1.) Homicide - Homicide is defined as the killing of a person by another - Here the facts clearly show that Al turned and shot at Dan[,] causing his death[.]
2.) Malice - Malice can be determined by one of four factors 1) intent to kill, 2) intent to cause serious bodily harm, 3) reckless and wanton behavior (depraved heart) 4) in the commission of an inherently dangerous felony.
a. Intent to Kill - Deadly weapon use absent any evidence to the contrary is sufficient to show intent. Al loading & shooting does this.
b. Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Harm -
It is clear that Al intended some harm even if he can show his intent was not to kill[.]
c. Reckless & Wanton - Al[']s firing of gun in the street in any direction should show reckless & wanton behavior[.]
d. Felony Murder - Was Al's action causing Dan[']s death in the course of a felony? If it can be shown that Al's action was inherently dangerous and the taking of the gun and ammunition in conjunction with the passing of counterfeit money satisfied the felony portion then Al would fall under the felony murder rule as well.
It seems on the facts that Al would be charged with first degree murder unless he could somehow mitigate the charge.
DEFENSES
1. Self[-]Defense - Al can raise the issue of self[-]defense because Dan
-7-
???
threatened to shoot him. However, self-defense is not viable in the commission of this act. Al had other options to remove this threat that did not require his use of deadly force (i.e. surrender).
2. Heat of Passion - Al may claim that he acted in the heat of the moment and not in a clear state of mind to try to mitigate to Voluntary Manslaughter[.]
3. Inadequate Defense -
All may have some other reason or justification allowing him to claim his action was based on behalf of facts not mentioned that led him to act in the manner he did[.]
4. Mental State - Because of intent requirement if Al could show an inability to form the intent he could then reduce the murder charge[.]
B.) Larceny - Trespassory taking of the property of another with intent to deprive
1. Taking - While Dan had placed the gun & ammo in a bag and placed it on the counter, it seems clear that as the money had not been fully exchanged - Al's grabbing would be a taking.
2. Intent - Al's use of counterfeit money and subsequent flight would indicate an intent to take the gun & ammo by trick if not directly. It would likely be argued that he formed the intent at the time he was confronted if not before.
3. His fleeing the store with the items clearly shows his depriving Dan of those items.
Defenses -
C.) Attempted Larceny by Trick
?????Defenses
1.) Al misrepresented the money as genuine in tendering same to Dan in exchange for the gun.
2.) Intent - His entering & using the counterfeit would seem to indicate his intent, particularly when coupled with his subsequent taking & fleeing when confronted[.]
Mistake - Al might try to argue that he did not know that the money was counterfeit, but his actions & lack of other facts make this
-8-

unlikely[.] D.) [sic]
-8-

Question 2
Seller inherited a collection of antique dolls from her aunt. In her aunt's estate, the collection had been valued at $15,000. On September 1, Seller wrote, signed, and sent the following letter to several well-known doll collectors in her area:
Dear Doll Collector:
I now own a collection of antique dolls that I'm
willing to sell for $15,000 to the first person who lets me know he or she wants the collection. This offer will be good for 30 days. If you want to inspect the dolls, I'll be happy to make an appointment. Phone me at 555-1765.
Seller
On September 3, Buyer, who was familiar with the collection, received the letter and immediately called Seller to arrange to inspect the dolls on the same day. Buyer appeared at Seller's home and inspected and photographed the dolls. She told Seller, "I'm interested, but I want to do some research. I'll get back to you." Seller said, "Okay, but my letter went out to a number of other people. I'm selling to the first one I actually hear from who wants to buy the entire collection."
On September 4, Buyer took the photographs to an expert doll appraiser and paid the appraiser $1,000 to evaluate and authenticate the collection. The appraiser told Buyer the dolls were authentic and worth at least $30,000. Buyer immediately phoned Seller, who was not at home. Buyer left a message on Seller's telephone answering machine saying, "This is Buyer. I like the dolls. Please call me at 555-8876 when you get home." Also on September 4, and just to be doubly sure, Buyer wrote and signed a letter to Seller stating, "I accept your offer to sell your doll collection for $15,000. Buyer," and deposited the letter in the mail at the Post Office.
Soon after Buyer returned home from depositing the letter at the Post Office, she received a phone call from Seller. Seller said, "I got your voice mail message. However, I just want to let you know that I've had an appraisal made of the collection, and I'm not willing to let it go for less than $35,000." Buyer responded, "You can't do that. I accepted your offer of $15,000, so you have to sell it to me for $15,000."
Was an enforceable contract formed binding Seller to sell the doll collection to Buyer for $15,000? Discuss.
-9-

?2)
UCC v. Common Law
Answer A to Question 2
Buyer v. Seller
A contract for the sale of goods will be governed by the UCC.
Since the dolls for which the parties are contracting are tangible, movable, and fully identified in the contract, they are goods as defined by the UCC, and the contract will be under the UCC.
Merchants
One who deals regularly with the goods involved in the transaction, or who otherwise holds himself out as having special knowledge or skill with the goods.
Although seller is selling to professional buyers, she does not deal regularly in dolls. Therefore, she is not a merchant under the UCC.
Buyer, as a well-known collector, was one who dealt regularly with dolls and who held herself out as having special knowledge and skill with dolls. Therefore, she is a merchant under the UCC and will be held to a heightened standard of good faith and fair dealing.
Offer
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is definite in terms and which is communicated to the offeree.
The letter by Seller mentioned the following terms:
Subject: Doll collection
Quantity: One
Price: $15,000
Parties: Although no specific party is mentioned, the offer is for the first offeree to respond to the offer.
Time: There is no time specified, so a reasonable time will be implied by the UCC. Therefore, the communication has sufficiently definite terms for a UCC offer.
Furthermore, the language "I'm willing to sell" shows that there was an intent to be bound on the part of Seller.
-10-

Moreover, the fact that Buyer received the offer shows that it was effectively communicated.
Therefore, there is a valid offer under the UCC.
Merchant's Firm Offer Rule
Where a merchant promises to hold an offer open in a signed writing, the offer will be held open for the specified time.
The offer by Seller promised that it would be good for 30 days. Buyer will argue that since the offer was written and signed by Seller, it falls under the merchant's firm offer rule and must be held open.
However, as discussed above, Seller is not a merchant. Therefore, the merchant's firm offer rule will not apply, and the offer is freely revocable by Seller.
Rejection
Where an offeree rejects an offer.
When Buyer had inspected the dolls and said she wanted to do some research, it could be argued that she had rejected the offer. However, there is no indication that she intended to reject, and her language indicated her intent to have the offer remain open for possible acceptance at a later time. Therefore, there has been no rejection of the offer by Buyer.
Acceptance
An outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
When Buyer left a message on Seller's phone, saying that she liked the dolls, she will argue that she accepted Seller's offer. However, her language was not unequivocal assent, since she said nothing about buying the dolls. It would have been reasonable for Seller to assume that she wanted to inspect the dolls again. Therefore, the phone message was not an acceptance.
Acceptance #2
An outward manifiestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
When Buyer mailed her letter stating "I accept" your offer, she showed her unequivocal assent to Seller's offer.
-11-

Normally, acceptances are valid upon dispatch based on the mailbox rule. However, Seller's offer expressly stated that acceptance would only be valid upon receipt, because she would sell to the first collector who "let her know" of their willingness to buy, not the first who mailed an acceptance. Therefore, the acceptance will probably be valid only when received by Seller.
Revocation
An offeree's revocation of his offer.
When Seller phoned Buyer and said, "I'm not willing to sell for less that [sic] $35,000", she made a statement inconsistent with the offer remaining open, and thus showed her intent to revoke her offer. Since she had not received the letter from Seller[sic], the offer had not been accepted and the revocation occurred before acceptance. Therefore, there was a valid revocation.
Detrimental Reliance on Offer rule
Where an offeror makes an offer which he should reasonably foresee to induce reliance on the part of the offeree, the offeree will be held open for a reasonable time to prevent injustice.
Seller will argue that she detrimentally relied on Seller's offer by appraising the dolls for $1000. Moreover, she will claim that this was foreseeable, because she told buyer that she would be researching the dolls.
However, Seller will claim that "doing research" does not foreseeably include paying thousands of dollars for evaluations. Therefore, this argument will likely fail and Seller's revocation will be effective.
Since Seller's offer was revoked, there is no enforceable contract.
If a court should find that Seller's acceptance was effective, the parties will proceed as follows:
Consideration
A bargained-for exchange of legal value, involving both benefit and detriment to both parties.
The contract called for the exchange of dolls for money. Since both parties incur detriment under the contract, there is valid consideration.
-12-

Defenses:
Statute of Frauds
A contract for the sale of goods of $500 or more must have a writing.
Seller will argue that since the contract was for the sale of goods of $500 or more, it must be in writing. However, since there is a writing signed by the party to be charged (seller), there is sufficient memorandum for the contract.
Moreover, Buyer could argue that by paying the appraiser she detrimentally relied on the contract, which may take it out of the statute under the UCC. However, since this occurred before acceptance, it was not reliance on the contract and this argument will fail.
Unconscionability
Seller may claim that by trying to enforce a contract to sell the dolls at half their value, Buyer was acting unconscionably. However, this is probably not a sufficient discrepancy in price for unconscionability to apply. Therefore, this defense will fail.
Unilateral Mistake
Seller will argue that there was a unilateral mistake as to the value of the dolls. Since Buyer knew about the mistake, her acceptance of the contract was in bad faith.
However, the contract was made on Seller's terms, and a court will probably hold it to be a mistake in judgment. Therefore, this defense will probably not apply.
Anticipatory Breach
Where a party, by his words, indicates his unequvocal intent to breach the contract.
When Seller said to buyer, "I'm not willing to sell for less than $35,000", Seller showed her intent to breach the contract by failing to perform her duty. Therefore, seller [sic] can sue immediately for breach of contract, and need not hold herself ready to perform.
Remedies:
Specific Performances:
Seller will probably argue that the goods were unique goods, since they were collector's items, and ask the court for specific performance. Since Seller still has the goods, a court will probably agree and give specific performance to Buyer.
-13-

General Damages:
If specific performance is not granted, Buyer may argue for expectation damages for her reasonable expectation under the contract. However, she will probably not get these as they are not the usual UCC remedy.
Reliance Damages:
Seller will probably collect compensation for the $1000 that she paid for appraisal in reliance on the contract, if this reliance was foreseeable.
Incidental Damages:
Seller will also collect the costs of bringing suit and getting specific performance.
-14-

2)
WHAT LAW GOVERNS?
Answer B to Question 2
?Contracts for the sale of goods are governed by the UCC. Goods are movable, tangible property.
Here the facts involve the potential sale of a set of antique dolls. Dolls are movable, tangible property.
Therefore, these facts will be governed by the UCC[.]
WERE THE PARTIES MERCHANTS?
Under the UCC, merchants are held to special rules governing the formation and enforcement of contracts. Merchants are those who regularly deal in the kind of goods in question or who hold themselves out [h]as having some special skill or knowledge as to the particular goods.
Here, Seller simply inherited a collection of antique dolls from her aunt. No facts suggest she had any prior knowledge or dealing with dolls and her apparent undervaluing of the dolls would support this inference. However, she sent a letter to "several well-known doll collectors in her area," one of whom was Buyer.
Therefore, while Seller is not a merchant, Buyer is.
CONTRACT
A contract is a promise or set of promises which the law will enforce and for the breach of which a remedy is available. A contract consists of an offer, acceptance, consideration and lack of defenses to formation and enforcement.
WAS THERE A VALID OFFER?
An offer is a present commitment to enter into an agreement communicated to an identifiable offeree and containing definite and certain terms.
SELLER'S LETTER OF SEPT. 1:
Seller's letter indicates a commitment to enter into an agreement to sell the dolls for $15,000. It is communicated to a number of well-known doll collectors, though it specifies that it can only be accepted by "the first person who lets [Seller] know he or she wants the
-15-

collection." By indicating that the offer, though sent to several individuals, is extended only on a "first-come, first-served" bases[sic]" Seller has communicated that the letter is, in fact, an offer, rather than simply an invitation to negotiate further (such as an advertisement). To be sufficiently definite, the UCC requires that the offer state the quantity and subject matter of the offer. Although "a collection" does not state a specific number, it is likely that this number would be known to doll collectors who would be familiar with the custom of the trade. Moreover, at common law, an offer is sufficiently definite when its terms can be determined for the purpose of establishing when a breach has occurred and what remedy would be available. Therefore, even if it were not immediately apparent from the offer how many dolls are included in a "collection," it is something that could be established to a reasonable degree of certainty sufficient for awarding a remedy in the event of breach. For the purpose of analysis, we assume the offer was sufficiently definite, though see below (PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL) in the event a court would find otherwise.
Therefore, it appears, at least provisionally, the Seller'[s] letter is a valid offer.
ACCEPTANCE?
Under UCC Sec. 2-206, an acceptance can made [sic] by any means reasonable under the circumstances unless otherwise specified in the offer. Here, the offer indicates that an interested buyer should contact Seller by phone at 555-1765. However, because of the context, a reader might also construe the letter as instructing someone to call in the event he/she wants to schedule an appointment to inspect the doll, in which case, any means reasonably [sic] under the circumstances would suffice as a mode of acceptance.
Here Buyer did, in fact, contact Seller by phone to schedule an appointment. Having inspected the dolls, however, Buyer said that she was interested but that she would need to get back to Seller after having done some research. As distinct from a rejection/counteroffer or an acceptance, Buyer's communication would probably be considered a communication of intent to continue negotiations. In any event, it is not an assent to the terms of the offer, so that it will not serve as an acceptance.
On September 4, however, Buyer again telephoned Seller, this time leaving a voicemail message indicating that she wished to accept the offer to purchase the dolls at $15,000. She also wrote a letter "to be doubly sure" to lock in the price and to beat out her competitors before they got to the dolls. Because Seller did not give any further or more specific instructions about how she wished to have the offer accepted, the parties' course of dealing suggests that acceptance by telephone, or, in the absence of both parties, by voicemail is an acceptable method of acceptance. The real issue here is timeliness rather than method, so that the letter would probably be superfluous if not for the additional problem of whether the statement "I like the dolls" is sufficiently unequivocal to communicate Buyer's acceptance. The letter indicates an unequivocal, so that if Buyer's acceptance by letter was timely, then her voicemail message is unnecessary.
-16-

TIMELINES OF ACCEPTANCE: MAILBOX RULES
Acceptance is effective upon dispatch.
Here Buyer deposited the letter in the mailbox.
Therefore, she accepted the offer, barring any exceptions to the Mailbox Rules.
EXCEPTIONS TO MAILBOX RULES; OPTION CONTRACTS/MERCHANT'S FIRM OFFER
Acceptance of an option contract is effective upon receipt. A merchant's firm offer is a writing, signed by a merchant, that indicates that an offer will be held open for a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed three months. Unlike a common law option contract, which requires consideration or at least purported consideration, a merchant's firm offer is valid, even absent consideration.
Although Seller indicates that "the offer will be good for 30 days," there is no apparent consideration, not even purported consideration from Buyer, so that this cannot be considered a traditional option contract. Additionally, as noted above, Seller is not a merchant, so that her letter of September 1 cannot serve as a merchant's firm offer.
Therefore, Buyer has accepted. TIMELY REVOCATION?
An offer is freely revocable at any time prior to acceptance. Revocation is effective upon receipt.
Here, Buyer deposited her acceptance in the mailbox and then returned home. Soon thereafter, Seller called attempting to revoke the offer. Because Buyer had already effectively accepted by mailing her letter before she received Seller's attempted revocation, Buyer'[s] acceptance controls.
CONSIDERATION
Legally sufficient, bargained-for exchange that constitutes a detriment to the promisee, induces current performance and creates a binding obligation on both parties. A promise for a promise is generally valid as consideration.
Here Seller indicated that she would sell a collection of antique dolls to the first person who notified her of an interest in purchasing the collection for $15,000. Buyer, in turn, accepted
-17-

this offer on its terms by mailing a letter on September 4 in which she specifically mentions the price, and thereby promises to pay the requested $15,000.
As a promise for a promise, there is valid consideration and, absent defenses to formation or enforcement, a valid contract exists.
STATUTE OF FRAUDS
Certain contracts to be enforceable must be in writing and signed by the party to be charged. Among these, the UCC requires that contracts for the sale of goods for $500 or more be in writing and signed by the party to be charged.
Here, Seller would be the party trying to avoid the contract (the party to be charged). A sufficient writing exists, however, because her September 1 letter states the necessary terms of the agreement and was signed by Seller.
Therefore, the Statute of Frauds will not bar this contract from enforcement.
OTHER DEFENSES?
There are no facts to suggest that other defenses might apply, as both parties appear to be competent adults dealing at arms['] length without overreaching or imposing oppressive terms. Therefore, there do not appear to be any defense of incapacity, illegality, unconscionability, mistake or misunderstanding. Seller's stat[e]ment, "Okay, but my letter went out to a number of other people. I'm selling to the first one I actually hear from who wants to buy the entire collection," does not rise to the leve[l] of duress, as it does not in any way limit Buyer's choices or hold over her any threat, other than the possibility that she will not be able to obtain the dolls if she does not act soon to purchase them.
If, as noted above, a court should find that the offer itself was insufficiently definite, by stating only "a collection" rather than a specific quantity, of dolls, then a valid contract would not have been formed, though there may be an alternative theory for Buyer to recover at least her expenditures for the appraiser.
PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL
Where the promisee reasonably, foreseeably and substantially relies to her detriment on the promissor's offer, the promise will be enforceable to the extent necessary to avoid injustice.
Here because Buyer informed Seller that she intended to conduct further research, arguably her $1000 is recoverable under a theory of promissory estoppel. It was both reasonable and foreseeable that she might have expenses--indeed, Seller herself decided to have the dolls appraised, indicating that it was not an unexpected or bizarre action to
-18-

take by one about to enter into an agreement for the sale or antique dolls. Additionally, $1000 is a substantial outlay, so that, in the unlikely event that the custom and usage of trade for antique doll collectors does not specify how many dolls are in a "collection," Buyer should at minimum be able to recover her $1000 under a promissory estoppel theory.
Question 3
Prof is a professor of torts and commercial law at University Law School ("ULS"). Prof's employment contract with ULS requires him to teach a certain number of hours, conduct research, publish scholarly works, be available for consultation with his students, and engage in community service.
Dave, one of Prof's students and research assistants, applied for a summer job with the State Office of Youth Assistance, an agency that houses and counsels troubled youths. Dave asked Prof to write a letter of recommendation for him. Prof agreed and wrote a letter recommending Dave highly and in unqualified terms. He sent the letter to the Office of Youth Assistance in a sealed envelope marked "Confidential."
Prof knew that the job for which Dave had applied required the incumbents to be in frequent close and unsupervised contact with young children. Prof also knew at the time he wrote the letter that Dave had admitted during a confidential disciplinary investigation by ULS that he had molested his girlfriend's young daughter and that Dave was undergoing counseling related to the incident. Prof did not mention anything about this in the letter because he did not want to hurt Dave's chances of getting the job and because he was convinced that Dave would not repeat his conduct.
Dave was hired by the Office of Youth Assistance. Toward the end of the summer, while conducting a private interview with a six-year-old girl, Dave succumbed to temptation and attempted to molest her. The girl's screams attracted the attention of Gina, a youth counselor working nearby. Gina ran to the rescue, but the stress of the situation caused Gina to suffer a debilitating heart attack.
Gina sues Prof and ULS for negligent misrepresentation, alleging that Prof is liable because of his neglect in failing to disclose what he knew about Dave in his letter of recommendation and that ULS is liable under the doctrine of respondeat superior.
Prof moves to dismiss Gina's suit on the grounds that (i) he owed no duty of care to Gina to disclose what he knew about Dave and (ii) even if did have such a duty, his breach of the duty was not the proximate cause of Gina's injuries.
ULS moves to dismiss Gina's suit on the ground that ULS cannot be held vicariously liable because writing letters of recommendations for his students was outside the scope of Prof's employment duties as a professor.
How would a court be likely to rule on each ground of the motions filed by Prof and ULS to
-19-

dismiss Gina's suit? Discuss.
3)
Question 3 Torts
Negligent misrepresentation
Answer A to Question 3
?Misrepresentation is the false assertion of past/present material fact, made with unreasonable conduct (negligence), causing reliance, upon which misrepresentation the plaintiff does justifiably rely, and the plaintiff suffers damages as a proximate result.
Negligent misrepresentation occurs when there is a duty to disclose or some relationship between P and D which incurs liability towards the plaintiff. Here, it could be said that although scienter and intent to induce reliance may not have been present, the elements for negligent misrep are present if the D's conduct fell below the appropriate standard of care. By representing Dave to be such an upstanding individual, D made a false assertion of past/present material fact, which D should have known would cause justifiable reliance upon the statement.
G v. Prof
Negligent misrepresentation results from the unreasonable conduct of D, which imposes an unreasonable risk of harm upon others, and which causes actual harm or injury to others as a proximate result of the D's negligence.
DUTY
When D acts affirmatively, D owes a duty of care to all foreseeable P's within the zone of danger. D has the responsibility and duty to act as an ordinary prudent person, and to refrain from acting in ways that impose risks of harm upon others. Here, D [P]rof acted affirmatively when he wrote a letter of recommendation for Dave. The real question is whether G can be considered a foreseeable P. The more obvious foreseeable P's to D's conduct were employers of Dave and the children with whom Dave would come into contact. However, as well known in tort law, danger does invite rescue and since G was not only a youth counselor, but a rescuer as well, rescuers are foreseeable plaintiffs. Therefore, G was a foreseeable plaintiff since she was a rescuer.
In addition, Prof was under contract with ULS to do certain things within his job description. These activities affected more people involved than just the other contracting party, (ULS),
-20-

and therefore, arising out of this contractual duty, a duty arose to all those affected by his assigned duties on the job.
STANDARD OF CARE
The applicable standard of care is that of an ordinary prudent person in same or similar circumstances. Here, D was a university professor who had basically the same duties as others with the same title. Here, as the writer of a recommendation letter for a student, D was required to act in the capacity of a reasonable person when doing so.
BREACH OF DUTY FAILURE TO DISCLOSE
Breach is established when the D's conduct is unreasonable. Unreasonableness is determined by a balancing method, which weighs the social utility of the D's conduct and the burden of reducing/eliminating the harm against the probability and gravity of the harm imposed by the conduct. Otherwise known as the Learned Hand Formula, D is liable is B5PL. Here, D's conduct may have been unreasonable since he personally had knowledge of the job description of Dave and knew that Dave would be in close unsupervised contact with young children. D also knew that Dave had admitted to molesting another young child. D acted unreasonably when he failed to include this information in the recommendation letter. Even if he did not want to clearly repeat Dave's history to the new employer, D could have abstained from writing such a glowing recommendation which recommended Dave in unqualified terms. Any reasonable person would probably have been reluctant to dismiss Dave's history, and would have been more objective in the letter.
D will counter that he did not breach his duty because he did not believe his conduct was unreasonable. D will claim that he was "convinced" that Dave would not repeat his conduct and was undergoing counseling related to the incident. D will claim that he was only trying to help Dave and did not want to hurt Dave's chances of getting the job. However, D imposed an unreasonable risk of harm upon the children coming into contact with Dave and upon rescuers (since they are foreseeable) because of D's unreasonable conduct.
CAUSATION
ACTUAL CAUSE
BUT FOR "sine qua non"/SUBSTANTIAL FACTOR
A cause is an actual cause of the harm if "but for" the D's conduct, the harm to P would not have occurred. Here, D negligently misrepresented Dave's character, and this would be an actual cause of G's harm if but for D's conduct, the harm to G would not have occurred. Here, had D not been negligent, D would not have been hired, would not have attempted to molest the child, and the G's rescue would not have occurred. Therefore, but for D's
-21-

conduct, the harm to G would not have occurred.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
INTERVENING/SUPERSEDING
WAS DAVE'S ATTEMPT TO MOLEST AGAIN A SUPERSEDING EVENT? FORESEEABLE CRIMINAL ACT
Proximate cause determines if the actual cause is sufficient to hold the D responsible for the P's harm. It determines whether intervening events break the chain of causation, and whether the resulting harm was a foreseeable consequence of D's conduct. An event is considered intervening if it occurs after the D's conduct occurs, but before the resulting harm. Here, D wrote a glowing recommendation, causing Dave to be hired. It was foreseeable that he would be hired after such a glowing recommendation letter. Considering Dave's history (and regardless of D's personal opinion that Dave would not molest again), it was foreseeable that he would succumb to temptation when around young children. G ran to the rescue of the young girl because of her screams. The girl's screams were a foreseeable result of Dave's attempt to molest her, and anyone coming to the rescue was also foreseeable because danger does invite rescue.
Furthermore, the ordinary negligence of rescuers is foreseeable, but rescuers' gross negligence, criminal acts of 3rd persons, and unforeseeable acts of God are unforeseeable. Here, the facts do not indicate that Gina was even ordinarily negligent. All that happened was that the stress of the situation caused her to suffer a heart attack. Again, it is foreseeable that one would be alarmed at hearing a young girl screaming.
THIN-SKULL/EGGSHELL PLAINTIFF
D [P]rof will try to establish that G's sensitive condition was pre-existing and sufficient to break the chain of causation. D is unlikely to succeed with this argument because the D must take the P as he finds her. Therefore, any prior condition of Gina's health will be irrelevant and the fact that her condition (if any) was aggravated would not break the chain of causation. D will be held liable for G's harm as long as it was foreseeable that D's negligent misrepresentation was a proximate cause of the harm.
DAMAGES
In negligence actions, the P may recover harm for actual damage in the form of personal injury/property damage, as long as that harm is quantifiable and reasonably ascertainable. Purely economic loss is not recoverable unless parasitic to personal injury/property damage. Here, G could recover for her pain/suffering, loss of wages, medical bills, etc.
-22-

DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
In jurisdictions adopting contrib negl, it is complete bar to recovery if the P's conduct falls below the reasonable standard of care which one should hold for himself. Here, there are no facts to suggest that G was contrib negl.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
The majority of jurisdictions nowadays have adopted comparative fault in place of contrib negl. In compa[ra]tive fault, the P's recovery is reduced in proportion to the amount of harm attributable to his own negligence.
PURE V[.] MODIFIED
Pure comp negl allows the P to recover even if she was more negligent that [sic] D. In modified comp negl jurisdictions, the P's recovery is barred if the P was more than 50% at fault as compared to D.
Again, there are no facts to suggest that G's recovery will be barred due to comp neg.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
ATR occurs where the P voluntarily elects to encounter a known understood risk of harm. D may counter that G was aware of the gravity of the situation when she heard the child's screams and[,] therefore, knew of the risk and voluntarily elected to encou[n]ter it. However, G will argue that just running to someone's rescue does not mean that G knew of the risk involved and that she would suffer a heart attack due to the stress. It is unlikely that D will have a successful defense against G.
G v[.]ULS
RESPONDEAT SUPERIOR
This doctrine imposes vicarious liability in several relationships, particularly employer- employee, as we have here. When an employee is acting within the scope/course of employment, his emp[l]oyer can be vicariously liable for all tortious acts committed in furtherance of the employment. Here, ULS is the employer who has hired Prof. Therefore, the employer-employee relationship is established.
COURSE/SCOPE OF EMPLOYMENT
Determining whether D's conduct was within the scope of employment will depend upon the similarity of his conduct with the description of his assigned duties. ULS required Prof to "be available for consultation with his students," and "engage in community service." It
-23-

seems foreseeable that a professor would write a letter of recommendation for a student, and especially for a research assistant (who probably had more contact with [P]rof than the other students). Therefore, D's conduct was close enough to his assigned duties/job description to be considered within the course/scope of employment. Furthermore, since Dave was more than just a student, his status of being on[e] of [P]rof's research assistants, made it likely that [P]rof would write such a letter.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Based on the information provided as to D's assigned duties towards ULS, it seems a foreseeable result of being employed at ULS that D would write letters of recommendation for his students. After all, "conducting research" is one of the assigned duties, and it seems natural that a professor engaging in research would need student help in the form of research assistants. Further, it does not break the chain of causation that he would write letters of recommendation for his students.
SUPERSEDING CAUSE - UNFORESEEABLE CRIMINAL ACT OF 3RD PERSON
However, the fact that Dave was no ordinary research assistant/student, but was actually a child molestor[,] may be sufficient to constitute an intervening cause, sufficient to break the chain of causation. An event will be superseding if it is unforeseeable, independent, and sufficient to break the chain of causation. So, since the criminal act of Dave was unforeseeable to ULS, then ULS would not be vicariously liable for the acts of professor.
-24-

Answer B to Question 3
3)
Prof's Motions for Dismissal I. Negligent misrepresen[t]ation
The prima facie case for negligent misrepresentation requires that the the [sic] misrepresentation be one of fact in which the Defendant was negligent in not discovering the truth and which the Plaintiff reasonably and foreseeably relied upon the misrepresentation and [,] such reliance was the actual and proximate cause of his injuries. All cases for negligence, including negligent misrepresentation, requires [sic] the defendant show a duty, a breach of that duty, that the breach was the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries and that the plaintiff suffered injury resulting from the breach and that the defendant has no valid defenses. Here, Prof's motions to dismiss focus on the duty element, claiming essentially that he owed no duty to Gina and proximate cause issues claiming essentially that unforeseeable intervening events breaks [sic] the chain of events from his act of writing the letter and Gina's heart attack.
I. Duty
A duty is a legal obligation to conform one's conduct to a recognized standard of care to avoid unreasonable risks to foreseeable plaintiffs. Generally, when one commits an affirmative act, he owes a standard of reasonable care to all people who might be injured by that act. Here, Prof wrote a letter of recommendation to the State Office of Youth Assistance (SOYA) recommending Dave. With this affirmative act, he owes a duty to anyone who might be foreseeably injured by this harm.
A. Foreseeable plaintiffs. In the Palsgraf case, the Andrews opinion holds that anyone who commits an affirmative act owes a duty to anyone who is harmed by that act. However, the current majority - the Cardozo opinion, holds that the duty flows only to those who are foreseeably harmed by the act. The specific tort being alleged here, negligent misrepresentation, generally require[s] a fiduciary duty and the duty flows only to those who might foreseeably be harmed by the misrepresentation. For example, an accountant who negligently misrepresents a company's books might be liable to the company's stockholders who foreseeably relied on those numbers. Or, as here, if SOYA relied upon his letter and were sued by the child[']s parents, they might have a cause of action against Prof. However, Gina is the one suing Prof and Prof will argue that because he has no fiduciary duty to Gina and because she is not a foreseeable Plaintiff for injuries caused by his writing a letter to SOYA he has no duty to conform his actions for her protection.
-25-
??
II. Proximate Cause
The Defendant's actions must be both the actual and proximate (legal) cause of the Plaintiff's injuries. Proximate cause issues are properly raised when the alleged negligent conduct is remote in time or place from the injures caused by that conduct. Here, the allegedly negligent conduct was Prof's writing of the letter recommending Dave for a position working with children knowing that Dave had a history of misconduct working with child. The injury is a heart attack and analysis of proximate cause revolves around foreseeability. The foreseeability of the plaintiff is discussed above, under duty. Here, we discuss the foreseeable type and extent of harm.
1. Intervening causes? The letter did not cause the heart attack; seeing Dave molesting the young girl caused the heart attack. Dave's molestation is criminal act and generally a criminal act will break the chain of causation. The exception to this is when the negligent act increases the likelihood or creates the conditions for the criminal act. Gina will argue that writing the letter put Dave in a position to accomplish the criminal act and therefore the criminal act should not break the chain of causation. In fact, Gina will argue that because Prof knew of Dave's previous molestations, the criminal act was actually foreseeable. However, Prof will argue that Dave was in counseling and that the letter, if negligent at all, only provided an incentive for hiring. There is nothing in these facts to show that the SOYA relied upon Prof's letter. We are told Prof wrote it and Dave was hired. Prof will argue that, according to these facts, his letter was not the cause of Dave being placed in position to molest the girl. It may have been[,] at most, a contributing factor[,] but the facts do not describe any specific reliance by SOYA on the letter.
2. Foreseeable type of harm? Negligently representing a child molester in "unqualified terms" in a letter does not foreseeably result in a heart attack for a coworker of the child molester. Prof will argue that the foreseeable type of harm resulting from this conduct is that a child would possibly be molested but not that someone will have a heart attack. However, the foreseeable harm did actually occur - a child was molested. Gina heard the child scream and, as is often put, "danger invites rescue". Gina ran to the scream, thinking a child was in danger and when she saw the danger suffered foreseeable harm from seeing a child being molested - specifically, she suffered stress and an ensuing heart attack. Thus, although the heart attack is not a directly foreseeable type of harm resulting from a negligent misrepresentation, the chain of causation is from the letter, to the hiring, to the molestation, to the rescue, to the heart attack. Gina will argue that each item in that chain was foreseeable and nothing intervened to break this chain (see above for whether Dave's criminal conduct serves as an intervening cause).
3. Foreseeable extent of harm? Under the current majority, if the type of harm is foreseeable, Prof will be liable for the full extent of the harm.
The court will likely rule Prof owed Gina no fiduciary duty and owed Gina no duty as she was not a foreseeable Plaintiff. Furthermore, the chain of causation is stretched extremely
-26-
??
thin and the act of writing the letter and the eventual injury of a heart attack is tenuous, only connected by the fact that the heart attack was induced by rescue.
ULS Motions for Dismissal
ULS is being joined in this suit as a codefendant under the doctrine of respondeat superior which imposes liability on the employer for the torts committed during the course of and in the scope of their employment. ULS has motioned for dismissal claiming that the Prof, even if he was negligent in writing the letter, did so on his own - letters of recommendation are not in the scope of his employment for ULS.
I. Not in scope of employment. We are told that the ULS-Prof employment contract requires Prof to teach, research, publish, perform community service and be available for consultation with his students. ULS is correct when the[y] say that writing letters is not part of the employment contract[,] however Gina will argue that it is [a] foreseeable part of the employment that Prof, who teaches and consults with students, will write letters of recommendation for students. In fact, she will be able to show that this is a very common occurrence and is in fact highly foreseeable. If she can show that part of consulting with students and working with students and grading students is also writing letters of recommendation, she can include Prof's conduct in the scope of employment which will impute liability to ULS on the basis of RS. She can also argue that if ULS did not want teachers to write these letters, they could easily have prohibited it. However, they did not and therefore should be liable for the foreseeable actions of their employees.
If Prof is found liable, the court will likely rule that ULS is liable under respondeat superior as writing letters of recommendation is a foreseeable activity within the scope of employment of a law professor.
-27-

Question 4
Dan intensely disliked his co-worker, Mona, with whom he was in direct competition for an important promotion at work. He knew that Mona and her husband, Otto, had a troubled marriage and that Otto suspected Mona of infidelity. He also knew that Otto had a very bad temper when provoked.
Hoping secretly that it would provoke Otto to kill Mona, Dan told Otto that he had seen Mona and another co-worker in a compromising position in the storeroom on several occasions. Believing what Dan told him, Otto went to Mona's workplace and hid in the storeroom. As he waited, he became angrier and angrier with each passing moment. When Mona entered to get some supplies, Otto jumped out from behind a cabinet, flew into an uncontrollable rage, yelled "Dan has told me what you do when you come in here. I'm going to kill you," and began to strangle her. Mona's screams attracted a security guard, who subdued Otto and freed Mona.
Dan and Otto have each been charged with solicitation of murder, conspiracy to commit murder, and attempted murder.
Do the facts support each of the charges against Dan and Otto, and what, if any, defenses might they each assert? Discuss.
-28-

?4)
Answer A to Question 4
People v. Dan
Solicitation of Murder. Solicitation is asking another to do an illegal act. Where the target (intended) crime requires a certain result (such as murder requires a homicide), the actor must desire that the result occur. While Dan (D) may have secretly hoped a murder would occur, he has not asked Otto (O) to kill Mona (M), or anyone for that matter. He has also not asked anyone to do anything illegal. Rather, D has provided O with information that he hopes will lead to M's death. This will bear on his liability for attempted murder. However, D has not committed the crime of solicitation of murder.
H Merger. A successful solicitation merges into the crime of conspiracy. Here, there was no solicitation, so there was nothing to merge.
HH
Conspiracy to Commit Murder. Conspiracy is an agreement between two or more parties to do an illegal act, or to do a legal act by illegal means. The majority of modern jurisdictions also require a minimal overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. Again, as above, D and O have not agreed to do anything. D gave O information that he hoped O would act on, but his true intentions were secret and there was no agreement between D and O to kill M, or anyone, or to do anything illegal. Therefore, D is not guilty of conspiracy to commit murder.
Attempted Murder. Attempt is the intent to do an illegal act, or bring about an illegal result, plus an act in furtherance of that intent. The target crime involved in attempted murder is, of course, murder, to be discussed infra. Here, the state will argue that D attempted to murder M.
H Specific Intent Crimes. Because attempt requires the intent to do an illegal act or bring about an illegal result, general intent crimes (as some types of murder are) cannot be the subject of malice. Specific intent crimes - those in which the actor intends his result can be the subject of an intent crime. Crimes requiring a knowing mental state can be the subject of attempt if the actor could be substantially certain that the illegal act or result would occur.
H Act In Furtherance. Traditionally, the act must have been in close proximity to the target crime. The Modern Penal Code (MPC) requires that the act be a substantial step toward completion of the target crime; an act is not a substantial step unless it is strongly corroborative of the actor's criminal intent. Here, D has undertaken an act in furtherance of his intent that M be murdered by setting in motion a chain of events which he hoped (secretly, of course) would lead to O's killing of M. Telling O, who[m] he knew had a very
-29-
??????
bad temper when provoked, something as provocative as the fact that he'd caught M in compromising positions with another person[,] constitutes a substantial step toward her killing and is in close proximity to her actual killing.
H H Use of Instrumentation. As a defense, D may attempt to argue that he did not intend to kill M, rather, only O did. D would argue that he simply gave O some information and that O was the "only" prospective murderer. In this case, however, O can be viewed as an instrumentality who, while human, is truly little different that [sic] an inanimate weapon such as a gun. Where one loads a gun and fires it at another, substantially certain that firing the gun will kill the intended victim, D "loaded" O with information that he hoped, and was substantially certain would, inflame the temperamental O to the point where he would kill M, or at least attempt to. Consequently, D clearly did undertake an act that was intended to result in M's murder.
HH Target Crime: Murder. Murder is an unlawful homicide, committed with malice.
HH Homicide. Homicide is the killing of anther live human being. Had the target crime been completed, Mona would have been killed, as D desired. Thus, the homicide element is satisfied for attempted murder.
H Malice. Malice can be satisfied through any of the following four manners: intent to kill, intent to do serious bodily harm, depraved heart and felony murder. Only one type of malice is relevant to this discussion:
H H Intent to Kill. Where the actor, intending to kill his victim, does so, this will be the appropriate charge. In this case, we are specifically told that D secretly hoped that O would kill M. The fact that his intent was secret is immaterial. The fact that D intended that M be killed as a result of his actions with regard to O is all that is needed to satisfy this element. Had O killed M, D would have been criminally liable for intent to kill murder. Because O did not kill M - and even if O had not acted on D's intentions, this would be the case - the malice element of the target crime is satisfied. Intent to kill being, by definition, a specific intent crime, it can be the subject of a charge of attempt.
H Degree. Intent to kill murders in which the actor premeditated the killing are first- degree offenses; without premeditation, intent to kill murder is a second-degree offense. Here, D had planned M's death, conceiving the plan to provoke O into killing her, thus premeditation is demonstrated.
H H Conclusion: D Guilty of Attempted First-Degree Murder. Because D intended that M be killed, and because he undertook an act in furtherance of that intent by attempting to provoke O into killing her, D will be criminally liable for attempted murder in the first degree of M. He has no defenses to this crime.
-30-
???????
HHH
People v. Otto
Solicitation of Murder. Defined supra. Here, O has not asked anyone to do anything, much less commit a murder. He has solely acted on information D gave him, secretly hoping to induce O to act. O is not criminally liable for solicitation of murder.
Conspiracy to Commit Murder. Defined and discussed supra. Conspiracy requires an agreement between two or more parties, and while O did eventually try to kill M, he did so of his own accord. O is not criminally liable for conspiracy to commit murder.
Attempted Murder. Defined supra.
H Act in Furtherance. Defined supra. O's strangling of M is an undeniable act in furtherance of his intent to kill M.
H Target Crime: Murder. Defined supra.
H H Homicide. Defined supra. O told M, "I'm going to kill you." Clearly, he
desired to commit the homicide of M.
H Malice. Defined supra.
H H Intent to Kill. Defined supra. O's statement that he was going to kill M demonstrates that he intended to kill her. Intent to kill being, by definition, a specific intent crime, it can be the subject of a charge of attempt.
H Degree. Defined supra. Here, it may be difficult to know for certain whether O actually premeditated for a long period on M's killing. However, by announcing his intention to kill M, O has demonstrated that he has at least thought about it for a moment, so premeditation is established and O will be liable for attempted murder in the first degree.
H H Conclusion: O May Be Guilty of Attempted First-Degree Murder. Barring a successful defense, O will be criminally liable for the attempted murder of M in the first degree.
HHH
Defense: Mitigation to Attempted Voluntary Manslaughter (VM). Where the elements below are satisfied, a party may mitigate a murder down to VM. Here, O will claim that the elements of VM are satisfied and that his attempted murder of M should be mitigated to attempted VM. The elements are:
H Reasonable Provocation. A provocation act must have occurred that would have -31-
????????????
caused a reasonable person to lose his self control to such a degree that he would kill. Because of the reasonableness standard, O's bad temper will be immaterial to this element. However, discovery of infidelity by a spouse has been held to be a reasonable provocation. Here, O had "learned," however incorrectly, that M had been unfaithful to him from D. If a jury finds that a reasonable person would have believed D's entreaties that M had been caught in compromising positions on several occasions to be a reasonable discovery of marital infidelity, then O will be able to establish this element.
H Actual Provocation. The actor must have actually been provoked by the provocative act; if the actor, not actually provoked, uses the act as a mere pretense for his crime, VM mitigation will not be available. We're told that O believed what D told him and acted on it by going to M's workplace and laying in wait for her in the storeroom, so he clearly was actually provoked.
H No Reasonable Cooling-Off Period. A period of time must not have lapsed in which a reasonable person would have regained his self-control. Again, the reasonableness standard makes O's temper immaterial. In this case, we do not know the length of time between the provocative act (learning of M's alleged infidelity) and O's attempt to kill M. We only know that O waited for M, but we do not know for how long. We also do not know how long it took O to get to M's workplace. Without this information, it is impossible to conclude as to whether there was a reasonable cooling-off period. If there wasn't, VM mitigation will not be available to O.
H No Actual Cooling Off. The actor must not have actually cooled off prior to his act. Here, we are told that, rather than cooling off, O became angrier and angrier with each passing moment, attacking her as soon as she entered the storeroom. O clearly had not actually cooled off.
HHH
Conclusion. If O can prove there was no reasonable cooling-off period, he will be able to mitigate his criminal liability down to attempted voluntary manslaughter. If he cannot, he will be criminally liable for the attempted murder of M in the first degree.
????-32-

4)
I. State vs. Dan
Answer B to Question 4
??a. Solicitation Of Murder: Solicitation is asking, aiding, enticing, encouraging others to commit murder with a specific intent that the crime be committed. The facts indicate that Dan secretly hoped that his conduct would provoke Otto to kill Mona. So the specific intent is established. Solicitation is complete when the act of enticing is done even if the solicitee rejects the solicitation. Here the act of telling Otto that Mona was having an affair with another coworker knowing that Otto had a trouble[d] marriage and Otto suspected Mona of infidelity and knowing that Otto had a very bad tamper [sic] will be sufficient to establish enticement impliedly. Therefore, he is most likely found to be guilty of solicitation. A crime once committed cannot be undone. Solicitation merges with conspiracy, attempt or completed crime. It is generally a misdemeanor.
b. Conspiracy to Commit Murder: An agreement between two or more person [sic] to commit an unlawful act or lawful act with an unlawful purpose and an overt act in furtherance of the commission of the crime with a specific intent that crime be committed. Conspiracy does not merge with attempt or the crime.
i. Agreement does not have to be express and it could be implied. In [a] majority of states it requires two guilty minds. Dan will argue that though he secretly hoped that Otto kill Mona [sic] but there was no express or implied agreement between the two.
ii. Two guilty Minds: In majority for conspiracy there should be at least two guilty minds. The actus rea and mens rea must concur. Here though Otto hoped that Dan will [sic] kill Mona, but the facts do not indicate whether at this time Otto had the specific intent to kill Mona.
iii. An Overt Act: Otto will assert that he did not do any act in furtherance of the crime. However, any act that is in furtherance of crime and committed by any coconspirator is sufficient for the overt act requirement. Here, Otto's going to Mona's workplace will be sufficient.
If the jury finds that there was no agreement between Dan and Otto to kill Mona either express or implied Dan may not be guilty of conspiracy. On the other hand if the jury finds that there was an implied agreement to murder Mona than [sic] Dan is guilty of conspiracy.
MPC Jurisdiction: An agreement with one or more person [sic] to solicit, attempt or commit a crime or aiding to planning and commissioning of the crime. MPC does not require two guilty minds. One guilty mind is sufficient. MPC does require an overt act. Therefore, in MPC jurisdiction Dan is guilty of conspiracy to commit murder as he
-33-
??????
solicited Otto by enticing him to commit murder.
c. Attempted Murder: The guilt of Dan will be based on vicarious liability based on solicitation or coconspirator. Under Pinkerton's rule, he is vicarious[ly] liable for the crimes of Otto which are in furtherance of the agreement and that are foreseeable unless Dan effectively withdraws. Dan had not withdrawn. So Dan is liable for attempted murder if Otto is liable for attempted murder (see discussion below). He will be vicariously liable based on solicitation in majority of jurisdiction [sic] and will not be liable based on coconspirator if he is not found to be guilty of conspiracy under majority as discussed above.
MPC Jurisdictions: MPC does not follow Pinkerton's rule. MPC finds a D liable only if [sic] acted in the commission of the crime or aided or abetted, that is only based on accomplice liability. Since Dan did not acted [sic] in the commission of the crime, he may not be found vicariously liable unless the jury finds that his act of telling Mona's infidelity is aiding and abetting[.] Then he will be guilty based on accomplice liability.
II. State vs. Otto:
a. Solicitation of Murder: Solicitation is defined supra. Otto did not ask or entice anyone. He is the solicitee and Dan is the solicitor. Therefore, Otto cannot be guilty of solicitation.
b. Conspiracy to Commit Murder: See supra for majority and MPC jurisdiction definitions. Since the conspiracy is between Dan and Otto, the discussion of conspiracy for Otto is similar to that of Dan. Otto will also argue that he did not have any agreement with Dan to commit murder. He will also argue that he did not have any intent to kill Mona. He went to her office just to confront her and to verify the veracity of Dan's statement. Since he did not have any intent than [sic] he cannot be guilty of conspiracy even under MPC jurisdiction where one guilty mind is sufficient.
c. Attempted Murder: Specific intent to kill and an act in perpetration of murder that is a substantial step and which is highly corroborative of the intent to murder.
i. Substantial Step: Here Otto went to Mona's office and hid in the storeroom. He jumped at Mona from behind the cabinet when she entered to get some supplies. Otto has gone to the [sic] Mona's office but the issue is whether this is highly corroborative of his intent to commit the crime. There is no substantial certainty that Mona will visit the storeroom. On the other hand Dan had told him that he has seen Mona in [a] compromising position in the storeroom and that's why he hid in the storeroom. So most likely his hiding in the storeroom and waiting for her to visit coupled with his strangling of Mona will be a substantial step.
ii. Specific Intent: The intent may be inferred based on D's statement or conduct prior to act and his relationship with the victim. Here Otto made a statement that he was going
-34-
????????
to kill Mona before he strangled her may be [sic] sufficient to show intent. Also, the fact that he was hiding and he believed that Mona was infidel [sic] may further be used to infer his intent to kill Mona. On the other hand Otto will argue that he did not take any deadly weapon with him nor he is an expert in strangling persons [sic] to death to negate his specific intent.
iii. Factual Impossibility: Otto may also argue factual impossibility. Factual impossibility exists when a D who seeks to perform a prohibited act is not able to do the act because of the facts unknown to him. Otto will argue that it is impossible to kill someone in a storeroom which is visited by all the employees with bare hand [sic] and he is not an expert. However, factual impossibility is not a defense to attempt.
iv. Heat of Passion: If Otto can show that he cannot be guilty of murder than [sic] he is also not guilty of attempted murder. So if he is able to show that had the crime been committed it would have been only voluntary manslaughter [sic]. Heat of passion can reduce the charge to voluntary manslaughter. This requires that:
a) a reasonable person is provoked (objective)
b) D was actually provoked (subjective)
c) a reasonable person would not have cooled off during the time interval between provocation and D's conduct (objective)
d) D was actually not cooled off.
It is reasonable that a person can be provoked when informed about wife's compromising positions and specially if Otto already suspected Mona of infidelity. However, seeing your wife having sex with other [sic] is sufficient for provocation, but hearing about the compromising position may not be sufficient for a reasonable person for provocation. So even if Otto is provoked but a reasonable person will not be provoked [sic]. Also, there probably is enough time for a reasonable person to cool off as he went to Mona's office and waited for her. In Otto's case he did not cool off[,] instead he got angrier. Since a reasonable person would not be provoked and would cool off, Otto's murder will not be mitigated to Voluntary Manslaughter.
State will argue that he had enough time to premeditate and deliberate in the storeroom to commit murder[,] therefore he is guilty of attempted murder.
??-35-


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2005
California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2005 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2005 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page Criminal Law 1
???Contracts Torts
Contracts
7 19 28
i

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?ii

Question 1
Bill and Tom worked together as drivers for Ajax Armored Car Co. After Bill reported Tom to the company's management for violating a company policy, the company fired Tom. Angered that Bill had "snitched" on him, Tom decided to get even with Bill.
Tom bought a pistol, some ammunition, and a rubber mask to use as a disguise. Expecting that Bill would follow the same route and schedule that had been in effect before Tom was fired, Tom hid behind a newsstand near a bank where the armored car ordinarily picked up the bank's daily receipts. He intended to put on the mask and rob Bill at gunpoint as he emerged from the bank with the bags of money. As it turned out, the company had altered the pick-up schedule so that the armored car had come and gone by the time Tom arrived at the location.
Even more irate that he had missed this opportunity, Tom decided he would make a bomb, follow Bill's armored car, plant the bomb under the car at a time when Bill was inside the bank picking up money, and detonate the bomb from a remote location as soon as Bill reentered the car. Tom bought a book that contained instructions for making a bomb that would be powerful enough to completely destroy an armored car, purchased the necessary explosives and detonation materials, and began to assemble the bomb in the garage attached to the house where he rented a room from the owner, who also resided there. While he was assembling the bomb, Tom inadvertently ignited the materials, causing an explosion and fire that resulted in burning down the house and garage.
What crimes, if any, did Tom commit? Explain fully.
1

Question 1: Tom's Crimes Attempted Robbery
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
??Robbery is the trespassory taking and carrying away of personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of it, when it is accomplished by force, threat of force, or intimidation. Tom did not accomplish this crime when he hid behind the newsstand with a pistol, ammunition, and a rubber mask, because the armored car had already come and gone by the time Tom arrived at the location.
Tom may have committed attempt if he intended that the crime of robbery be completed, and took a substantial step toward such completion, going beyond mere preparation. The facts state that Tom intended to rob Bill at gunpoint. While Tom's purchase of a gun and mask could be characterized as a mere preparation, when he hid behind the newsstand, Tom was dangerously close to completing the crime, if the facts were as he believed them to be (i.e. the previous truck schedule). Therefore Tom committed attempted robbery.
Attempted Larceny
Attempted larceny is a lesser included crime of attempted robbery. Therefore Tom also committed attempted larceny, though he cannot be convicted of both.
Attempted Murder (Robbery Incident)
Tom is not guilty of attempted murder for the robbery attempt because at that time he had no intent to kill. His use of a gun probably constitutes malice because it is reckless disregard for human life, but to be guilty of attempt, one must intend the prohibited result, i.e. Bill's death. Likewise, felony murder malice is insufficient for attempt.
Defense of Impossibility
Tom may raise the defense of impossibility or mistake of fact in that it would actually be impossible for him to have robbed Bill because of the schedule change. This defense will fail, however, because if the facts had been as Tom believed them to be (i.e. the previous schedule), he would be guilty of attempt.
Attempted Murder (Bomb Incident)
Tom is guilty of attempted murder if he intended to kill Bill and took a substantial step toward accomplishing his goal. As stated supra, malice is not sufficient for attempted murder. However, when he started making the bomb, Tom did intend to kill Bill, because he planned to detonate a bomb planted in the armored car, completely destroying it, once
2
????
Bill had reentered. He will be found to have intended the natural and probable consequences of his planned actions.
In addition, Tom must have gone beyond mere preparation. Tom's purchase of a book and materials may be mere preparation, but when he began to assemble the bomb, he took a substantial step toward completing his crime that brought him in dangerous proximity to completion.
Attempted First-Degree Murder
In addition, if the jurisdiction has a degree murder system that classifies first-degree murder as murder accomplished by bomb, poison, lying in wait, etc., then Tom would be guilty of attempted first-degree murder. In the case of the definition being premeditation and deliberation, Tom is also guilty, because he made a cool-headed rational decision over time.
Attempted Larceny or Robbery
Tom is likely not guilty of these crimes for the bomb incident, because he did not intend to take and carry away the armored car or money, but destroy it by bomb where it stood.
Arson
Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling of another. Malice may include reckless disregard as to consequences. Tom acted with malice because he was building an illegal bomb in a private home for use in a murder. He did not intend to burn the house, but he did act with the required malice. The fire Tom inadvertently did [sic] burn down the house. The owner did reside there, so it was a dwelling, and Tom was not the owner, so it was the dwelling of another. Tom is guilty of arson.
Attempted Arson
Tom could not be convicted of arson and attempted arson because they would merge. In addition, Tom did not intend the prohibited result of arson, i.e. the burning of the dwelling of another. Tom is not guilty of attempted arson.
Houseburning
Tom may also be guilty of the common law offense of houseburning, because he burned his own house, if it threatened neighboring houses. However, here Tom is guilty of the greater crime of arson.
3
?????
1)
STATE v. TOM
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
?1) Did Tom commit ATTEMPTED ROBBERY of Bill?
Under criminal law, attempted robbery is committed when a significant step is taken toward the commission of a crime with the intent to commit the crime. A significant step is one that is more than mere preparation. Robbery is a larceny, a trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal tangible property of another with the intent to permanently deprive, from the victim's person or presence by force or fear.
Here, Tom clearly had intent because he "intended to put on the mask and rob Bill" and he was doing this to "get even with Bill." He had the intent to rob because he was going to take the bags of money from Bill when he emerged from the bank. The[n] this would have been a tresspassory taking and carrying away of the property of another because Tom was going to take the money and the money belonged to the bank and its customers. It would have been committed by force or fear since Tom intended to put on the mask as a disguise and rob Bill at gunpoint.
Tom also took a significant step toward the commission of a robbery because after buying a pistol, ammunition, and a rubber mask, he went to a place near the bank and hid while waiting for Bill to arrive in the armored car, where he intended to rob Bill when he arrived pursuant to the normal pick-up schedule. He chose and arrived at a place to wait, knowing the delivery route and schedule, expecting Bill to arrive [at] a particular time so Tom could rob him.
Therefore, Tom committed an attempted robbery.
2) Can Tom assert the defense of IMPOSSIBILITY?
Under criminal law, factual impossibility occurs where unforeseen circumstances prevent the commission of an otherwise illegal act. Legal impossibility is found where the defendant intends an act, thinking it is illegal, but at the time attempted it is legal. Factual impossibility is not a defense to attempt, legal impossibility is.
Here, there was a factual impossibility, because the [sic] Tom intended to commit an illegal act, a robbery. The robbery was only prevented because the company had altered the pick-up schedule so that the armored car had come and gone by the time that Tom had arrived at the location.
Therefore, since this was a factual impossibility, this defense will fail. 4

3) Has Tom committed an ATTEMPTED MURDER of Bill?
Attempt is defined supra. Here the requisite intent would be the intent to commit the murder of Bill. Murder is an unlawful homicide, the killing of one human being by another, with malice. Malice can be established in several ways, including the intent to kill or the intent to cause serious bodily injury.
Here, the facts show that Tom decided to make a bomb and use that bomb to destroy the armored car the [sic] Bill was driving. Further the facts show that Tom had bought a book that contained instructions for making a bomb that would be powerful enough to destroy the armored car. Also, Tom planned to wait for Bill to complete his pick-up and wait for him to "reenter" the armored car before detonating the bomb. This clearly shows that Tom had an intent to kill Bill since it is very unlikely that a person in a vehicle that is completely destroyed by a bomb would survive the explosion.
However, Tom will argue that he did not take a significant step toward the commission of the murder because the bomb detonated before he had finished assembling the bomb. He will argue he never came close to killing Bill since he never arrived at the potential scene of the crime. The state will argue that Tom did commit a significant step when he bought the book, purchased the necessary explosives and began to assemble the bomb. Tom's argument will probably fail.
If the state can show that Tom's actions constituted a significant step, the[n] Tom has committed attempted murder of Bill.
4) Has Tom committed ARSON of the house and garage?
At common law, arson was the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another. Modernly arson is defined by statute to include other structures as well as the defendant's own home if the intent is to collect the insurance proceeds. Malice is an act intended to bring about the criminal result or an act with willful and wanton disregard that the criminal result would occur.
Here, Tom will argue that he had no intent to burn the dwelling because his act of igniting the explosive materials was inadvertent. Further, he will argue that this was not more than ordinary negligent conduct and would thus be insufficient for a charge of arson. However, the state will argue that building an explosive device in the attached garage of a residential building would constitute gross recklessness, particularly in light of the fact that the intent of the bomb was for the perpetration of a murder. Additionally, there are no facts to suggest that Tom had any experience in dealing with explosives since his profession was that of an armored car driver and he had to buy a book to learn how to make a bomb. The state will likely prevail on this point.
There was a burning of a dwelling house because it was a "house" and it was "burned." The initial burning of the garage would suffice since it was an attached garage and would
5

be considered either part of the dwelling or at minimum the curtilage of the house.
Tom will argue that it was not the dwelling house of another because he lived there (rented a room). However, the house was owned by someone else, and the owner also lived in the house and Tom only rented a room from the owner; therefore it was the dwelling house of another.
Therefore Tom has committed an arson.
6

Question 2
Buyer manufactures mattresses, which feature an outer layer composed of a cotton material called "batting." Unexpectedly, Buyer's supply of batting ran out, which brought the entire production line to a halt at a time when Buyer was trying to fill a large, special order from Sleepco, one of his customers. Buyer's regular supplier of batting refused to deliver any more batting because Buyer was behind on his payments to the supplier.
On May 1, Buyer telephoned Cotton Co. and told Cotton Co. that he urgently needed a large bale of batting and that he was willing to pay "top dollar" if Cotton Co. would deliver the bale of batting by the end of the day.
On May 1, Cotton Co. delivered the bale of batting and told Buyer it would send him Cotton Co.'s invoice for $5,000 later in the week. Buyer was upset because the price was about 30% higher than that charged by his regular supplier but, because of his urgent need, Buyer opened the bale and began using the batting to make mattresses.
On May 2, at a time when Buyer had used about 5% of the batting, Sleepco called and cancelled the order. This cancellation was such a major blow to Buyer's financial condition that he announced that he would immediately close his manufacturing plant.
On May 5, Cotton Co. learned that, in fact, Buyer had been insolvent for the past 60 days. On May 6, Cotton Co. demanded that Buyer either pay the invoice or return the unused part of the bale of batting immediately. Buyer refused, asserting that he and Cotton Co. had never entered into an enforceable contract, and informed Cotton Co. that he had sold the remaining batting to another mattress manufacturer.
1. Can Cotton Co. prevail in an action for breach of contract against Buyer?
2. Does Cotton Co. have the right to reclaim the unused batting? Explain fully.
7

1. COTTON CO. V. BUYER
1. U.C.C. V. COMMON LAW
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
???The U.C.C. will govern contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are items which are identifiable and movable at the time of sale.
This contract is for the sale of a bale of cotton batting. Cotton batting is movable and identifiable at the time of sale; therefore, it is a good[.]
This contract will be governed by the U.C.C.
Merchants
One who regularly deals with the goods which are the subject matter of the transaction or otherwise holds himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the goods which are the subject matter of the transaction[.]
Cotton Co. sells cotton batting as a business; therefore, they regularly deal with the goods involved. Further, since they manufacture the batting, they will have special knowledge and skill regarding the batting. Therefore, Cotton Co. is a merchant[.]
Buyer makes mattresses which use the batting, and must order great quantities of batting. Therefore, Buyer regularly deals with the subject matter involved. Further, since Buyer uses batting in his manufacturing, he likely has special knowledge and skill of the batting. Thus, Buyer is also a merchant[.]
Therefore, both parties are merchants under the U.C.C. and will be held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing[.]
1. FORMATION
A valid contract consists of an offer and an acceptance, collectively known as mutual assent, plus consideration, minus applicable defenses[.]
OFFER
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is definite in terms and is communicated in such a way as to create in the offeree the reasonable expectation that the offeror is willing to enter into a contract[.]
Buyer called Cotton Co. and made Cotton Co. an offer with the following definite terms: 8
???
Quantity One bale
Time of Performance Before the end of the day Identity of Parties Cotton Co. and Buyer
Price "Top dollar"
Subject Matter One bale of cotton bating
Buyer will argue that this is not sufficiently definite to constitute an offer, since no price term is included. However, Cotton Co. will argue that, under the U.C.C., only a quantity term is needed to make the offer definite, so long as the parties unequivocally manifest intent to contract. Here, Buyer stated the quantity of one bale; therefore, the terms are sufficiently definite.
Cotton Co. will argue that Buyer made a sufficient manifestation of intent under the objective theory of contracts because a reasonable person in Cotton Co.'s shoes would believe that, by asking for delivery of a specific quantity of goods, and promising to pay, the party promising to pay intends to enter into a contract[.]
Further, Cotton Co. will show that Buyer created the power of acceptance in Cotton Co. by providing that Cotton Co. could bind Buyer to a contract simply by delivering the cotton bale before the end of the day.
Cotton Co. will argue that the offer gives them the power to set the price term since Buyer did not state a price, but said he would pay "top dollar" for the bale. If the court finds that Cotton Co. has the power to set the price term, Cotton Co. must set the term in good faith, or Buyer may set the term in good faith himself. If the court finds that the statement of "top dollar" was an ambiguous term that did not give Cotton Co. the power to set the price, the courts will set the price at the time of delivery[.]
This is likely an offer[.]
Unilateral vs. Bilateral Contract
A unilateral contract requires acceptance by performance, a bilateral contract requires acceptance by a return promise[.]
Here, Buyer stated that he would pay "if Cotton Co. would deliver the bale of batting by the end of the day." Cotton Co. will argue that Buyer is bargaining for performance, not a promise, since Buyer only wants to be bound to the contract if the bale is delivered by the end of the day.
Buyer may counter that they wanted assurance from Cotton Co. that delivery would be made, and the term "by the end of the day" was condition, not the means of acceptance.
Where the court finds that the contract may be either unilateral or bilateral, acceptance may 9
??????
be made by any means reasonable under the circumstances[.]
Therefore, Cotton Co. may accept the offer by any reasonable means[.] Acceptance
An outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer[.]
Cotton Co. delivered the batting before the day was over. This is an outward manifestation because Cotton Co. physically delivered the bale. Further, it showed unequivocal assent because Cotton Co. impliedly agreed to all the terms of the contract.
Buyer will argue that Cotton Co. did not properly accept because they set a price term which was 30% above what Buyer usually pays. However, as discussed supra, Cotton Co. may have had the power to set the price term. If Cotton Co. had that power, Buyer must show that the price was not set in good faith.
However, even if Buyer can show the price was not set in good faith, Cotton Co. will likely successfully show that Buyer accepted the price term by accepting the goods and using part of them. Cotton Co. will show that this is implied assent to the term under the objective theory of contracts because a reasonable person would believe that using goods knowing the terms of sale demonstrates one's willingness to be bound[.]
Here, the facts do not state if Cotton Co's price was unreasonably disproportionate to the fair market value of the batting. However, if it was found to be unreasonable, Buyer may then set the price in good faith. However, Cotton Co.'s failure to set the price does not affect the validity of the acceptance.
Cotton Co. will show that, because the offer did not specify whether acceptance could be made by promise or performance, delivery in the time stated was a reasonable means of accepting[.]
This is a valid acceptance[.]
Consideration
A bargained-for exchange of legal benefit and detriment[.]
Each party incurred a legal detriment because Cotton Co. was giving up goods in exchange for Buyer giving up money.
Further, each party received a legal benefit because Cotton Co. received money and Buyer received goods.
The exchange of money for goods was what induced each party to contract, because each 10
??
party viewed what they gave up as the price for what they received. Therefore, the exchange was bargained for[.]
Buyer may argue that Cotton Co.'s ability to set the price rendered the contract illusory. However, because Cotton Co. is obligated to set the price in good faith, Cotton Co. is under a legal obligation; therefore, it is not illusory.
There is sufficient consideration[.]
Defenses to Formation
Statute of Frauds - Sale of Goods at $500 or more
Contracts for the sale of goods at $500 or more must be in writing in order to be enforceable[.]
This contract is for the sale of batting, which is a good. Further, the price is $5,000, which is over $500. Therefore, the contract must be in writing in order to be enforceable.
The facts state that the contract was made orally over the phone, with the only writing being an invoice sent by Cotton Co. Therefore, the contract was not in writing[.]
This will be a valid defense absent an applicable way to remove the contract from the statute[.]
Part Performance
Part performance of a sale of goods contract will render the contract enforceable as to the portion which has been performed[.]
Here, Cotton Co. sent all the batting to Buyer; therefore, the contract has been partly performed because the goods have been delivered.
Thus, the contract will be enforceable under the Statute of Frauds for all goods now delivered[.]
This is not an applicable defense[.]
Unconscionability
Buyer will argue that the contract is unconscionable because the contract price is 30% above what Buyer usually pays. However, the facts do not state how disproportionate the contract price is to the fair market value of the goods.
Many courts do not allow a contract to be voided because of disproportionate terms; 11
??
however, in a minority of courts Buyer may prevail if he can show that the price is grossly disproportionate to the value of the goods.
This is likely not an adequate defense[.]
Indefiniteness
Buyer may argue that the contract was not sufficiently definite because the price term was not set. However, as noted supra, quantity is the only term required under the U.C.C., and that term is definite[.]
This is not an adequate defense[.]
Ambiguity
Buyer may argue that the contract is too ambiguous to be enforced. However, the required terms under the U.C.C. are not ambiguous, and the price term can be objectively set either by Cotton Co., or by the court[.]
This is not an applicable defense[.]
CONDITIONS
An act or event not certain to occur, the occurrence of which either discharges an absolute duty to perform or causes an absolute duty to perform to arise[.]
Express Condition Precedent
A condition stated in the contract which must occur before one party's duty to perform arises[.]
If the court finds that the statement requiring "delivery by the end of the day" was a term of the contract, Buyer will show that this is an express condition precedent to Buyer's duty to pay, since Buyer specifically stated that he would not pay if it was not delivered on time[.]
This may be a condition[.]
Fulfillment of Condition
An express condition must be perfectly fulfilled[.]
Cotton Co. delivered the batting on time; therefore, the condition has been fulfilled and Buyer's duty to perform has arisen[.]
???DUTY
?12

Buyer has a duty to pay the full contract price for the batting[.]
DISCHARGE OF DUTIES
Impossibility
A contract which becomes objectively impossible through unforeseen circumstances will discharge the duties under the contract so long as the risk of the impossibility occurring was not assumed by the party seeking discharge[.]
Buyer will argue that it is impossible for him to perform because he does not have any money and the buyer of his mattresses canceled their orders.
However, other parties could pay the contract price; therefore, it is not objectively impossible to perform. Further, Buyer likely assumed the risk of the impossibility occurring, since loss of money is a known risk which manufacturers assume[.]
This is not an applicable discharge[.]
Impracticability
A contract where an unforeseen event makes the terms so disproportionate as to be commercially impracticable will be discharged where the risk of the circumstance creating the impracticability was not assumed by the party seeking discharge[.]
Buyer will argue that the contract is impracticable because the price term is so high. However, no event caused the term to become disproportionate; Buyer accepted the term at the beginning of the contract[.]
Further, the facts do not demonstrate that the term is grossly unfair so as to be nearly unconscionable[.]
This is not an applicable discharge[.]
Frustration of Purpose - Henry v. Krell [sic]
A party's duty under the contract may be discharged where the essential purpose of the contract is destroyed by an unforeseeable event, the risk of which was not assumed by the party seeking discharge[.]
Buyer will argue that, when Sleepco canceled their order, the essential purpose of the contract was frustrated, since Buyer no longer needed the batting to fulfill the large order.
However, Cotton Co. will show that the purpose of the contract was the sale of the batting, 13
?
and nothing in the facts indicate that Cotton Co. had reason to know of Buyer's purpose for the batting.
Further, Buyer likely assumed the risk of the frustration occurring, since cancellation of orders is a known risk which manufacturers assume[.]
This is not an applicable discharge[.]
BREACH
An unjustified failure to perform one's duties under the contract[.]
Cotton Co. will argue that Buyer is in major breach because Buyer refuses to pay for the goods. Payment for the goods is the essential purpose of the contract.
Buyer is in major breach[.]
REMEDIES
Expectation Damages
Cotton Co. may recover the contract price since Buyer fully accepted the goods and will not return them for resale.
Therefore, Cotton Co. will prevail in an action against Buyer for breach of contract[.]
2. DOES COTTON CO. HAVE A RIGHT TO RECLAIM THE UNUSED BATTING?
Bona Fide Purchaser
Buyer sold the batting to another manufacturer. The manufacturer who bought the batting did not know of the breach by Buyer regarding the contract; therefore, the repurchaser bought the batting in good faith.
Because the batting was purchased in good faith without knowledge of the breach, the repurchaser is a bona fide purchaser of the batting.
The law generally holds that recouping goods from a bona fide purchaser would result in unjust hardship to the purchaser; therefore, Cotton Co. may not receive the batting back, since the repurchaser purchased in good faith[.]
Cotton Co. may not recover the batting, though they may sue for the contract price as discussed supra[.]
14
???
15

2)
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
?I. Can Cotton prevail in action for breach of contract against Buyer?
1. What law applies? The common law is the general rule governing contracts except where superseded by the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC)[,] which governs contracts for the sale of goods. Here, the contract subject matter is a bale of cotton batting, which is a moveable good. Therefore the UCC governs.
2. Are the parties merchants? A merchant is one who, by his trade or occupation is an expert, or who holds himself out as an expert, in the goods of the kind. Here, Buyer manufacturers mattresses, which require a layer of cotton batting. Since in order to be in the mattress business, Buyer must regularly deal in cotton batting, Buyer would be considered an expert in cotton batting and therefore is probably a merchant. Cotton is a merchant because they deal in cotton batting as their trade. The rights of the parties will be affected by specific UCC rules applicable when both parties are merchants.
3. Was a contract formed? A contract is formed through a bargaining process of offer, acceptance and exchange of consideration where both parties agree to a mutually agreed set of terms.
a. Was there an offer? An offer is a manifestation of a present intent that would reasonably be interpreted as intent to enter into a contract. On M[a]y 1 Buyer called Cotton to say Buyer urgently needed a bale of cotton and would pay "top dollar" if it was delivered that day. Cotton was the identified offeree, the subject matter was a bale of cotton, and the quantity was "one". Buyer offered to pay "top dollar.["] The offer was a unilateral offer in that Cotton could only accept if they delivered that bale by the end of that day.
i. Was a term ambiguous? "Top dollar" is not a clear unambiguous price term, but under UCC, the court could find a price for the cotton from the market price prevailing at time and place of delivery. Therefore the offer does not fail for the term.
b. Was there an acceptance? Acceptance requires that the offeree manifest their present intent to enter into a contract. Under the common law, acceptance had to "mirror image" the offer. However, under UCC acceptance can be made in any manner reasonable. Here, Cotton accepted by delivering the bale of cotton by the end of the day. Therefore they complied with the terms of Buyer's offer and accepted by performing as requested.
4. Was there consideration? Consideration is a legal detriment that the party 16

provides to bind the promise of the other party, and must [be] the object of the other[']s pro[m]ise and be given in exch[a]nge for the other[']s promise. Consideration is leg[a]l detriment if it is an act or right that the party was not otherwise obligated to do or refrain from doing. Here, Cotton delivered the bale based upon Buyer's promise to pay "top dollar". Since the value of "top dollar" can be supplied by the court, the value comprises legal detriment and there is sufficient consideration to bind the agreement.
5. Since the parties clearly intended to enter into a contract each with the other, they assented to mutual terms sufficient that a reasonable person would find a contract existed. Therefore, upon delivery of the bale, a contract was formed.
6. Defenses to formation.
a. The Statute of Frauds (SOF) requires that certain contracts be evidenced by a writing suffici[e]nt to enforce the contract. Under UCC, a contract for goods for $500 or more requires a writing. Here, the parties made an oral promise and accepted performance. There is not writing apparent from the facts. However, there are substitutes for the written contract[.]
1. A merchant[']s confirming memo would be a sufficient writing, where the parties are both merchants and the memo is signed by one party, delivered to the other, and the other does not object within ten days. Here, Cotton states th[a]t they were going to send Buyer an invoice; however it is not stated tha[t] they did. If they in fact sent the invoice it would be sufficient if Buyer does not object.
2. Performance is an exception to the requirement for a writing. Here, Cotton delivered the bale of cotton and performed under the contract. Therefore a writing is not required and the contract is outside SOF and therefore enforceable.
b. Unilateral Mistake is a defense to formation where one party relied on a mistaken material fact and the other party knew or should have known that the first party was mistaken. Here, Cotton bargained for the return payment of Buyer under the belief that Buyer was able to pay. Subsequently, Cotton discovered that Buyer was insolvent for 54 days prior to their offer. Since Buyer expressly offered to "pay top dollar", they knew that Cotton would rely upon their payment in entering into the contract. Buyer also knew that they were insolvent. Since they knew this fact and knew that Cotton would rely, the contract is voidable by Cotton for unilateral mistake.
7. Performance
a. Cotton delivered the bale and Buyer accepted it and began using the
cotton. Therefore Cotton's portion of the contract was complete. Completion of Cotton[']s performance matures Buyer[']s duty to perform; which is in this case the duty to pay "top dollar".
17

b. Repudiation. Buyer announced it was closing its manufacturing plant. Of itself, this is not a repudiation of its contract with Cotton. However, Cotton learned that Buyer was insolvent for the past 60 days. Coupled with the closure of the plant, this was information from a reliable source that raised doubts as to Buyer[']s ability to perform.
1. Reasonable assurance: Cotton then demanded that Buyer either pay or return the goods. This demand was effectively a demand for reasonable assurance that Buyer would perform. When Buyer refused, it was an anticipatory breach. Cotton[']s rights under the contract accelerated, and they were able to accelerate their rights. Here, their rights are to receive "top dollar" for the bale of cotton.
8. Defenses:
a. Frustration of Purpose: Buy[e]r will assert that commercial frustration [sic]. Here, Buyer urgently needed the bale in order to fill a contract with Sleep [sic]. Once Sleep [sic] canceled their contract, the purpose for buying the bale was frustrated. Here, however, Buyer did not inform Cotton of the purpose for the urgency. Therefore Cotton did not know of the purpose of the contract and frustration of purpose is inapplicable.
II. Does Cotton Co. have the right to reclaim the batting?
1. Voidable contract: Here there was a mistake of fact that made the contract voidable by Cotton. Ordinarily, Cotton would have a right to reclamation. However, here the bale was sold to a good faith purchaser, which cuts off the rights for reclamation. Therefore Cotton would have no right to reclaim the bale.
18

Question 3
Roofer contracted with Hal to replace the roof on Hal's house. The usual practice among roofers was to place tarpaulins on the ground around the house to catch the nails and other materials that were scraped off during the removal of the old roof. On this occasion, Roofer did not have enough tarpaulins, and he failed to place one on the ground at the rear of Hal's house. As a result, many nails and old roofing material fell into the grass of Hal's back yard. At the end of the job, Roofer did his best to clean up the back yard but missed some of the nails that were imbedded in the grass.
About six months later, as Hal was mowing his back lawn, his lawnmower ran over one of the nails and propelled it over the fence into the back yard of Ned, his neighbor. A few days later, as Ned was walking barefoot in his back yard, he stepped on the nail, which pierced his foot, causing him severe injury.
In an action brought by Ned against Roofer for negligence, what defenses might Roofer reasonably assert, and what is the likely outcome on each? Explain fully.
19

3)
Ned v. Roofer
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
?A prima facie case of negligence requires a showing of a duty to exercise reasonable care, that the defendant breached the applicable standard of care[,] and that the breach was the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injury. To defend against a negligence cause of action, Roofer may assert passive defenses challenging the negligence elements as well as active defenses including assumption of the risk, or comparative fault/contributory negligence depending on the jurisdiction.
1. Did Roofer owe Ned a Duty?
a. A duty is a legal obligation to exercise reasonable care to prevent foreseeable harms to foreseeable plaintiffs. In a leading case (Palsgraf v. LIRR), Judge Cardozo detailed that a foreseeable plaintiff is one who is within the zone of danger; however, in the same case, Judge Andrews argued for the minority opinion that if a defendant owes a duty to anyone, he owes a duty to everyone. In appropriate cases, a duty may arise as a result of a statute, contract, special relationship between the defendant and the plaintiff, where the defendant assumes a duty, or where the peril to the plaintiff is caused by the defendant.
b. Here Roofer will argue that he owes no duty to Ned given that Ned was not a foreseeable plaintiff. Ned was a neighbor an[d] outside the area where Roofer was dropping items from the roof and there is minimal possibility of direct harm. However, Roofer clearly owed a duty to Hal and his family and under the Andrews view would therefore owe a duty to Ned.
c. Ultimately this will be decided by the jury; however, under the Cardozo view, Roofer would appear to have a defense. Under the Andrews view, a duty is apparent.
2. Did Roofer breach the standard of care?
a. The standard of care is generally an obligation to exercise a reasonable amount of care under the circumstances. Breach can be demonstrated where there is a violation of a statutory standard of care (Negligence Per Se), under the Le[a]rned Hand Calculus, or by making an inference of breach under the doctrine of Res Ipsa Loquitur. In this case the Le[a]rned Hand Calculus is appropriate and is expressed in the following formula. (B<P*L) where B is the burden of conforming conduct to an appropriate standard [of] care sufficient to avoid harm, P is the probability that a harm[-]causing event would occur, and L is the magnitude of the harm/loss should the anticipated harm[-]causing event occur. Analysis is perceptual as opposed to mathematical and where the burden is less than probability and magnitude of the loss, the act of the defendant shall be deemed to have breached the standard of care.
20

b. Here the burden on Roofer is to have done a better job of picking up the nails (possibly using a magnet if the nails were ferrous) or simply to have gotten sufficient tarps. The burden of conforming his conduct would not have involved significant expense or effort and is therefore low. The probability of the type of harm, a nail in the foot or theat the nail would be picked up by the lawnmower[,] is significant while the magnitude of loss, puncture, pain and the need for a tetanus shot as well as limping for a few days or weeks is low. Roofer will argue, however, that his efforts to pick up the nails were reasonable because he "did his best". Further, it is not clear that he warned Hal that he missed some nails and to be careful.
c. As such, it is clear under the Le[a]rned Hand Calculus, given that the burden is exceeded by the probability and magnitude of loss, a breach is likely to be found and Roofer will not escape liability on this basis despite his best efforts.
3. Was the act of Roofer the actual and proximate cause of Ned's injury?
1. For negligence liability, the act of the defendant must be the actual (factual) as well as proximate (legal) cause of the plaintiff's injury.
a. Actual Cause?
1. Actual cause is based on whether the harm would have occurred without the act of the defendant and is measured using the "But For" Test or the substantial factor test. The "But for" test poses the question "but for" the act of the defendant, would the plaintiff [have] been injured? The substantial factor test requires only that the act of the defendant be a substantial factor in the harm that resulted.
2. Here, but for Roofer not picking up all of the nails, Ned would not have been injured. Roofer will argue that the lawnmower was the actual case; however, an injury is not restricted to one cause. In any event, the substantial factor test would demonstrate that Roofer's failure to recover all of the nails was a substantial factor in Ned's harm.
3. Roofer's act was the actual cause and he will not likely be able to defend on this basis.
b. Proximate cause?
1. Proximate cause is the legal cause of injury. A showing of proximate cause requires that the injury sustained be not so distance [sic] in time, place and effect from the act of the defendant that a court would refuse to assign liability. Additionally, a showing of proximate cause requires that there must not be an independent (unforeseeable) intervening event that occurred between to [sic] act of the defendant and the harm suffered by the plaintiff such that is [sic] would break the chain of causation.
21

2. Here, Roofer will argue that the six month intervening time period was too distant in order to establish proximate cause. Additionally he may attempt to argue that the use of the Lawnmower by Hal was an independent intervening cause. This defense is not likely given that Hal's need to mow the grass was foreseeable. It is further foreseeable that if the lawnmower hit a nail, that it might cause it to be deposited in the yard of a neighbor. While the act of using the lawnmower was an intervening cause, it was not independent because it was foreseeable. Since the use of the lawnmower is foreseeable, it would not appear likely that when it was used would be relevant to the occurrence of the harm[-]causing event. An additional intervening act was Ned's decision to walk barefoot in the yard. It is not clear that this will be seen as a foreseeable event although it is likely since it was Ned's yard and it is presumed that he would walk in it from time to time.
3. Based on the discussion, Roofer has plausible defense here, but it is unlikely that this defense will prevail.
4. Did Ned Sustain Damage?
a. For negligence liability, the plaintiff must suffer actual damage. Damage includes pecuniary (medical, lost wage[,] etc[.]) and non-pecuniary (pain and suffering generally).
b. Here the facts are clear; the nail punctured Ned's foot and he suffered severe injury.
c. Ned sustained damage sufficient to sustain his cause of action and Roofer will not be able to defend on this point.
5. Can Roofer Raise Affirmative Defenses? a. Did Ned Assume the Risk?
1. Assumption of the risk requires a showing that the plaintiff knew of the risk of harm and voluntarily encountered the risk. Where proven, it is a complete bar to recovery.
2. Here Roofer will argue that Ned likely knew of the work being performed on Hal's house and the possibility of nails in the yard. His decision to walk barefoot in the yard therefore evidenced his assumption of the risk that his foot would be punctured if not by a nail, a sharp stick or twig in the grass.
3. It is not likely that this defense will succeed but if accepted, it would allow Roofer to completely avoid liability.
b. Contributory negligence of Ned? 22

1. In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, any negligence on the part of the plaintiff is a complete bar to recovery. A negligent plaintiff may still recover provided that the defendant had the last clear chance of avoiding the harm to the plaintiff and knew that his act placed the plaintiff in danger.
2. Here, Ned's decision not to wear shoes, especially after roofers were tossing nails off of Hal's roof, might be viewed as being contributory negligent. There is no evidence, since it was 6 months later, that Roofer was aware of the potential harm to Hal or that he had any chance to avoid it.
3. If accepted that Ned's decision to walk barefoot was negligent, it will completely bar his recovery from Roofer.
c. Comparative Fault of Ned?
1. In a pure comparative fault jurisdiction, the liability for damage of the defendant is reduced in proportion to the fault of the plaintiff. While not a complete bar to recovery it will reduce the potential award if the plaintiff's negligence is proven. In a modified comparative fault jurisdiction there are two approaches. In one, the plaintiff's award is reduced in proportion to his fault but is eliminated completely where the plaintiff's proportion of fault exceeds 50%. The other provides that the plaintiff's award is reduced in proportion to his fault but is eliminated completely where the plaintiff's proportion of fault is equal to or exceeds 50%.
2. Ned's negligence discussed supra at contributory negligence.
3. If Roofer prevails with a showing that Ned was contributorily negligent, it is likely to reduce the award that Ned will be entitled [to].
Conclusion:
A prima facie case of negligence likely exists. Roofer has a potential defense on the basis of proximate cause; however, should this fail, he will have to apply an affirmative defense. If a contributory negligence jurisdiction, a complete bar to recovery is likely. If a comparative fault jurisdiction, he can likely rely on some diminishment in the award in proportion to the fault attributed to Ned.
23

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
?3)
NED V. ROOFER
Negligence
??Negligence is the breach of a duty owed which is the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries.
Duty:
A duty is owed to foreseeable plaintiffs.
Cardozo view (majority) - Anyone in the zone of danger created by the defendant's negligent conduct is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Andrews view (majority) - Anyone is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Here, Ned is an occupant of a neighboring house to Hal's where Roofer replaced the roof. Because he is physically close to where the roofing was going on and if the houses are spaced close by, as shown by the facts because the nail propelled from Hal's lawnmower went over the fence and into Ned's backyard, Ned is in the zone of danger.
And[,] in any case, under Andrews anyone is a foreseeable plaintiff. Therefore Ned is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Standard of care
Reasonable person test
A person is held to the standard of conducting himself as a reasonably prudent other person would do in the same or similar circumstances.
Special duty - Professionals
A professional is held to the standard of care of another professional in the same community who holds the required credentials, skill[,] and competency of the profession.
Roofer will be held to the standard of a professional roofer.
????Custom in the trade
?24

Custom in the trade will be considered as evidence of what a reasonable professional's duty is. If he does not live up to the standard it will be considered evidence of a breach. However even if he does conduct himself to the customs of the trade it is not always proof that he acted with due care because due care may require a higher standard than produced by following customer[sic].
Here the custom in the roofing trade is to place tarpaulins all around the ground around a house where the roofing is being replaced. The purpose of the tarpaulins is to catch old nails and other materials that get scraped off when the old roof is removed.
Here Roofer had a duty at a minimum to place tarpaulins all around Hal's house when he removed the old roof and replaced the new roof.
Breach
Is an unjustified failure to perform the duty as set out above.
Here, when Roofer showed up for the job without enough tarpaulins to cover the ground and failed to place one at the rear of Hal's house he breached his duty because another professional roofer would have made sure he had enough tarpaulins before starting the job. Although Roofer "did his best" to clean up, he missed some nails that were imbedded in the grass in the backyard.
Roofer will argue that missing some of the nails is not a failure of his duty because there are a lot of nails in a roof and even with the tarpaulins in place it is possible that old roofing materials and nails could be scattered anyway even with due care, making reasonable efforts to catch them on the tarpaulins[,] and to clean up.
However, Roofer's failure to provide enough tarpaulins is a breach of duty. He did not conduct himself to the standards of another professional roofer with credentialed expertise in the community.
Therefore Roofer is in breach. Actual cause
The defendant is said to be the actual cause of the plaintiff's injury if it can be said "but for" the defendant's negligence the plaintiff would not have been injured.
Here it is possible that the nail that Roofer missed was not one of the nails that would have been caught by the missing tarpaulin. However not having the tarpaulin was a substantial factor in not catching all the nails and the facts are that the nail that injured Ned was one from Hal's backyard and that was the area not covered by a tarpaulin.
Therefore Roofer is an actual cause of Ned's injury. 25
??
Proximate cause
Is a policy limiting liability to those injuries which are foreseeable at the time of the defendant's negligent conduct. We look to see if there are any intervening acts and if so if [sic] are they [sic] foreseeable.
Here, Ned was severely injured by a nail piercing his foot. The nail came from Hal's backyard, the area which Roofer had failed to cover. The act of Hal's running over the nail with [h]is lawnmower and propelling the nail into Ned's yard is an intervening act. We look to see if it is foreseeable ---- and it is foreseeable that if nails are left on the lawn of a homeowner that he will mow the lawn and the mower will kick up a nail. Therefore the kicking up of the nail is foreseeable.
It is at issue whether it is foreseeable that not using a tarpaulin on a roofing job would cause a neighbor to be injured by an errant nail kicked up by a lawnmower?[sic] One way courts have looked at the injuries is that if the type of injury is foreseeable, the exact manner in which it occurred is irrelevant[;] it will not break the chain of causation from the defendant's initial negligent act.
Another issue is if the injury from the nail was too remote in time from the roofer's negligence. This injury happened six months after roofing was done and it may be too remote in time for the courts to consider that the injury was proximately caused by the roofer's negligence. Six months later if proper yard maintenance was being done or Hal was more observant perhaps any remaining nails would have been discovered.
Roofer is the proximate cause of Ned's injury.
Damages
In order to prove prima facie cause of negligence, the plaintiff must suffer damages.
Here, Ned suffered a severe injury to his foot and this is a personal injury sufficient to show damage.
Ned will recover general damages for his pain and suffering and special damages for his medical, hospital bills and for lost wages.
Defenses
Contributory negligence
The plaintiff fails to conduct himself as a reasonable prudent person in order to prevent injury to himself.
In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, contributory negligence is complete bar to plaintiff's
26
????
recovery.
Here, Ned was walking barefoot in his back yard and stepped on the nail. Roofer will argue that Ned contributed to his own injury because he should have been wearing shoes. However it is common for people to walk in their own backyards with bare feet and it is not at all unreasonable to do so.
Roofer will not have the defense of contributory negligence.
Comparative negligence
In a comparative negligence jurisdiction the plaintiff's recovery is reduced by his degree of fault. In a pure comparative negligence jurisdiction, the plaintiff will recover no matter how great his degree of fault. In a modified comparative negligence jurisdiction the plaintiff can only recover if his negligence does not equal or surpass the defendant's percentage of negligence (depending on if a 49% or 50% jurisdiction.)
Therefore even if Ned is found slightly contributory negligent he will be able to recover his damages less his degree of fault.
Assumption of the risk
A person voluntarily assumes a known risk.
Here Ned is simply walking barefoot in his own backyard, something which he likely does often and from which he has received no injury. Therefore he is not assuming a risk of anything by being barefoot. He of course knew that nails and roofing material were coming down from Hal's house when he saw Hal's house being re-roofed but Ned saw the tarpaulins and the cleaning up and would not have expected any nails in his yard[;] therefore he could not have voluntarily assumed any known risks.
Therefore assumption of the risk is not a valid defense.
??27

Question 4
Sam decided he was ready to sell his classic sports car. On May 1 and in the following order, he telephoned Bob, Carla, Dan, and Edna, each of whom had earlier expressed interest in buying the car. He was unable to make actual contact with any of them, so he left the following message on each one's telephone answering machine: "I'm ready to sell my car, which I know you've expressed interest in. The price is $10,000. My offer is good until the end of today, May 1. If you're still interested, call me back by the end of today so I'll know for sure."
Bob, Carla, and Dan each called back at a time when Sam was out running errands. They each left a message on Sam's telephone answering machine.
Bob's message said, "The price is pretty high, so I'll have to think about it."
Carla's message said, "I think the price is too high, but I'd be willing to pay you $9,000."
Dan's message said, "OK, I'll pay your price but only if you'll let me take the car to my mechanic so he can check it out first."
Edna, rather than call Sam back, mailed Sam a letter on May 1 stating, "I got your message, and I accept your offer and will pay $10,000."
On May 2, Sam died. Mark was appointed as executor for Sam's estate, and as such had all powers to deal with the estate property. Bob, Carla, Dan, and Edna each said to Mark, "I accepted Sam's offer on May 1, and, in any event, I will buy the car as is and for Sam's asking price." Mark tells them each that their so-called acceptances were not valid and that their power of acceptance has already terminated.
IsMarkcorrect? Explainfully.
28

4)
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
?The rights and remedies of the parties depend on whether or not there is a valid contract. A contract is a promise or set of promises, the performance of which the law recognizes as a duty, and [for] the breach of which the law provides a remedy. A valid contract is based on an offer, an acceptance, and legal consideration.
Which law governs?
Under contract law, the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) governs contracts for moveable goods identifiable to the contract, otherwise the common law prevails. Here, the contract is for a classic sports car, which is a moveable good identified to the contract. Therefore, this contract is governed by the UCC.
Are the parties merchants?
Under the UCC, merchants are those who deal in goods of that kind, and hold themselves out by occupation, or knowledge and expertise regarding the good in the contract. Here, the parties are not merchants because they are one time, casual buyers and seller of one good. Therefore, the parties are not merchants.
Is a writing required?
Under contract law, the Statute of Frauds doctrine requires that certain goods be in writing, including those for the sale of goods over $500. Here, the bargain is regarding the sale of a good for $10,000, which would require a writing.
Was there an offer by Sam on May 1?
An offer is a manifestation of present intent and willingness to enter into a bargain, so justified that a reasonable person (offeree) would know that his assent is invited and would conclude it. Under common law, the essential terms are the parties, subject matter, quantity, price and the time of performance. Under the UCC only the price are [sic] required and UCC "gap fillers" can determine the remaining terms. An advertisement or public offer made to more than one person is an invitation to bargain.
Here, Sam showed a present intent and willingness to enter into the bargain because he called four different people that had showed [sic] previous interest in buying his car to sell it to them. A reasonable person would believe that this was a present intent and willingness to enter into a bargain. Here, his message was definite and certain because although the parties were not specifically identified, all other terms were present[,] such as the subject, the car, the quantity one car, the price of $10,000-which is an essential term for a UCC contract and the time for performance is May 1, a material term to the offer when
29
????
it is expressly stated. This communication to the four people was an offer inviting performance, or another promise for the $10,000 until the end of the day.
Did the offer lapse due to an operation of law?
An offer may be revoked due a lapse of time due to an operation of law when the offeror dies before an acceptance is made, or the goods are no longer available. Here, Sam died on May 2, and his offer for acceptance was due on May 1, therefore, the offer was not revoked due to a lapse of time from operation of law, and his estate can be liable for cause of action.
Bob v. Sam's Estate (Mark) Acceptance
Under contract law, acceptance is an assent to enter into the bargain, by any reasonable manner, with varying terms.
Here, Bob did not assent to enter into the bargain because he said, "I have to think about it," which a reasonable person would claim expresses uncertainty, and interest, but not an assent to enter a bargain at the present time. Therefore, this would not have been an acceptance to Sam's offer.
Carla v. Mark
Acceptance
Definition, see supra. Here, Carla assented to into the bargain, but offered varying terms. Since the parties are not merchants, the offer of varying additional and inconsistent terms would be a proposal or a counteroffer to Sam's offer, and would not have been an acceptance to Sam's offer. In addition the varying term was an additional inconsistent (material) term of the original offer and would require Sam's approval before it was considered. A change in price is a material term because it significantly shifts the offeror[']s economic advantage. Therefore, Carla would not have effectively accepted Sam's offer.
Dan v. Mark
Acceptance definition see supra. Here, Dan assented by saying, "O.K.," but it was based on a varying condition "if" you'll let me take the car to my mechanic so he can check it out first. Since Sam's offer limited acceptance to the terms of his offer, Dan would have had to take the car to the mechanic before the end of May 1 with Dan's approval. Varying terms that are consistent (not material) with the offer can be accepted if the offeror does not object within a reasonable time. Here, Sam did not object and the offer could have been accepted, but since the acceptance was based on a condition of the offeree that was not met before the deadline of the offer, it would not have been a valid acceptance because
30
???????
the deadline would have passed.
Edna v. Mark
Acceptance see supra. Here, Edna accepted Sam's offer by a return promise, a bilateral contract. Under the Mail Box Rule, an acceptance to a bilateral contract is effective upon dispatch. Here, Edna mailed her acceptance on May 1, the deadline for acceptance, however Sam's offer specified that acceptance was based on "a call back by the end of the day", thus Sam would have had to receive Edna's offer by the end of May 1[,] which was not done. Therefore, Edna's acceptance would not be valid.
Conclusion: Mark was correct and all of the parties' power of acceptance would have terminated.
??31

Ans. 4
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
??UCC - Since this case involves sale of car (a movable property), provisions of UCC apply. However, none of the parties seem to be merchants from the facts of the case as they do not seem to regularly trade in cars or seem to have expert knowledge in it.
BOB v. SAM's estate
Offer - A valid contract is formed when there is a valid offer, valid acceptance[,] and mutual assent of terms between parties backed by mutual consideration.
Offer: An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent communicated by the offeree which is definite and certain in its terms, which gives a power of acceptance to the offeree such as any reasonable person in the shoes of the offeree can presume that he could conclude a bargain by giving an assent to the terms of offer in the manner indicated by the offerer.
Sam's offer contains all the following essentials of a valid offer[:] Qty - One Sports Car
Time of Performance - Reasonable time (ready to sell)
Identity of Parties - Sam & Bob
Price - $10,000
Subject Matter - Classic Sports Car with Sam
Since all essential elements of a valid offer are present it forms an offer.
Whether Multiple letters cons[t]itute circular - overorder.
It can be argued that since Sam has sent same letter to 4 persons, it could be construed as a circular and since there was a risk of overordering (more than one party accepting the offer), hence it is merely an invitation to offer and not a valid offer. However, since Sam's offer was quite clear on its terms and there was no way for each of the addresse[s] of his telephone call to know that there was more than one person to whom offer has [sic] been made, each of the offer [sic] is valid. Sam runs the risk of overordering should such a case arise.
The offer by Sam by leaving telephonic message is valid.
Acceptance: An acceptance is an unequivocal assent to the terms of offer.
In this case Bob left the message that "the price is pretty high, so I will have to think about it." He therefore did not communicate his unequivocal assent by accepting the offer by the "end of today" as was indicted by Sam. His telephone message was therefore not a valid
32
??????
acceptance and the offer of Sam to Bob would lapse by the end of that day.
There being no valid acceptance by Bob, there was no valid contract between Sam and Bob[.]
CARLA vs. SAM's estate Offer: As discussed supra. Acceptance:
As defined supra.
Since Carla left the message "I think the price is too high, but I'd be willing to pay you $9,000," Carla did not give an unequivocal assent to the offer, as she did not accept Sam's offer on price. Her message indicating her willingness to pay a price of $9,000 is a counteroffer, which acts as a revocation of original offer of Sam. Sam now would have the power to either accept or reject the counteroffer of Carla.
However, since Sam died on May 2 before responding back to Carla, [he] did not communicate his acceptance to Carla, so there was no contract between Carla and Sam.
Carla could argue that it is a UCC contract, price is not one of the essential elements to make it a valid contract, as reasonable price could always be substituted so long as Q[']ty is definite. However, neither are the parties merchants nor did the offerer (Sam) wanted [sic] the price to be open in his offer, since price was an essential part of Sam's offer, any acceptance had to give an assent to the price since it was expressly stated in the offer.
There is thus no valid contract between Carla & Sam. DAN vs. SAM's estate
Offer: As discussed supra.
Acceptance - Definition supra.
Dan wanted to first get the car inspected by his mechanic to check it out, although he did agree on the price. However, since he made his acceptance conditional upon his mechanic checking, he did not communicate his unequivocal acceptance to the offer by the end of the day, as called for by the offer of Sam.
There was thus no contract between Sam & Dan. EDNA vs. SAM's estate
33
??????
Offer: As defined supra.
Acceptance: As defined supra.
Edna did accept the offer, price of $10,000 and also mailed his [sic] offer on May 1.
Mail Box Rule: As per Mail Box Rule, any acceptance is valid and effective upon despatch. In this case Edna has sent his [sic] offer on May 1 itself (deadline set by Sam), therefore it should be a valid acceptance. However, an exception to Mail Box Rule, is there when the offerer indicated manner of acceptance for the offeree. Sam's offer clearly says ... "Call me back by the end of today so I'll know for sure..." Since an offerer is a master of his offer, Sam had clearly left this message giving importance to the time and manner of commun[i]cation so that he could be sure of acceptance by the end of the day.
Since Edna did not indicate his [sic] acceptance by return phone call, his [sic] acceptance cannot be valid. It may at best be a counteroffer for the offerer.
Since Sam died before reading the reply of Edna, there was no chance for him to accept Edna's counteroffer. There was thus no valid contract with Edna.
Mark is therefore correct that none of the above 'so called acceptances' of all the parties were valid and their power of acceptance terminated
a) - by not communicating unequivocally about acceptance in proper manner by end of May 1
b) - Death of Offerer - Death of offerer also automatically revoked the offer.
????34



??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2005
California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2005 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2005 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question
Number
Subject Page
???Contracts 1 Criminal Law 11 Torts 19
1.
2.
3.
4. ? Contracts 28
?-i-

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?-ii-

Question 1
Ed is the owner of the newly opened Ed's Custom Car Wash, where car washes cost $25. While he was grocery shopping in his home town, which is located 20 miles from Ed's Custom Car Wash, he was greeted by his friend Alice. After they chatted for a moment, Ed said, "Come by my new car wash and I'll give you a free car wash tomorrow." Alice replied, "Thanks. By the way, we've got a few extra tickets for the game tonight. If you want them, they're yours."
A few minutes later, Ed ran into police officer Brown, who worked in Ed's home town. Ed said, "Officer Brown, if you will drive by my house soon and make sure everything is OK, I'll give you a free car wash tomorrow." Officer Brown, who was about to begin his job of patrolling Ed's neighborhood, replied, "I accept your kind offer." Officer Brown then left the store and began his routine patrol, which, as always, promptly took him by Ed's house, where everything was in order.
When Ed returned home from shopping, he saw his next door neighbor, Charlie. Ed said, "Charlie, I'll give you a free car wash tomorrow at my new car wash." Charlie replied, "Thanks, I'll take you up on that."
As soon as Ed arrived at work the next day, he found a long line of cars at the car wash. He phoned Alice and Officer Brown, and told them that he would not give them free car washes. Then he saw Charlie, who had left work and driven for one-half hour to get to the car wash and was waiting in line. Ed immediately told Charlie, "I am not going to give you a free car wash."
Does Ed have an enforceable obligation to Alice, Officer Brown, or Charlie? Discuss.
?-1-

Answer A to Question 1
?1)
I. ED AND ALICE: ENFORCEABLE OBLIGATION?
In order to determine if a valid enforceable obligation exists between Ed and Alice, it must first be determined if a valid enforceable contract exists between the parties. As this contract involves services, the Common Law of contracts would govern. To be enforceable, a contract requires mutual assent (offer and acceptance), consideration, and there must be no valid defenses to enforcement.
A. Mutual Assent. To be enforceable, a contract must first be based on valid mutual assent. The two primary components of mutual assent are the offer, and acceptance. An offer is a commitment communicated to an identified offeree containing definite terms. Therefore, these elements must all first be established. If there is a valid offer made by Ed to Alice, it would have occurred while the two of them were chatting. During their conversation, Ed said to Alice "[C]ome by my new car wash and I'll give you a free car wash tomorrow." When judging the validity of a commitment, an objective test is used: [W]ould a reasonable person, hearing the words spoken and under the circumstances, believe that the other party intended to enter into a contractual agreement[?] Here, as the owner of a new car wash, Ed's offer to Alice could be viewed as either a favor, or as part of a promotion. Since the facts indicate that she was Ed's friend, it might be the former, particularly in light of the fact the offer was made twenty miles away from his car wash, and arguably, Alice may not desire to drive so far to get her car washed. As this offer was communicated directly to Alice (the identified offeree), stating the exact terms of the offer (free car wash tomorrow), the other elements are here satisfied. Therefore, if it is determined that Ed's offer was indeed a valid commitment, a valid offer will be found to exist.
To be accepted, there must be an unequivocal statement of assent to the terms of the offer, communicated by the offeree back to the offeror. Here, Alice said "[T]hanks," but no more. Although not exactly the strongest form of assent, this would nonetheless appear to be unequivocal. Furthermore, it was communicated directly to Ed, the offeror. Therefore, it appears that a valid acceptance was made. However, since Ed called Alice early the next day to tell her that he would not give them free car washes[sic], was the offer revoked?
1. Revocation. Generally, an offer may terminate due to its own terms; by acts of the parties; or by intervening illegality. Here, when Ed called Alice and advised her that he would not perform under the agreement, he effectively revoked his offer. Unless the offer is not freely revocable, then his revocation would terminate Alice's ability to accept Ed's promise. Therefore, the offer may have already terminated prior to proper acceptance. Alternatively, the additional element consideration must be determined to be present for this contract to be properly formed.
-2-
???
B. Consideration. For there to be valid consideration, there must be a bargained-for exchange between the parties; in other words, the promise must induce a current exchange of performance from the other party. Additionally, there must be new legal detriment to support the promise. Finally, the promise must be binding and obligatory; it must not be illusory or discretionary. Here, Ed promised to wash Alice's car for free. But what did Alice promise Ed? While it is true that, following Ed's offer, Alice did state: "[B]y the way we've got a few extra tickets for the game tonight; if you want them, they're yours," this statement was made after Alice had already accepted Ed's offer. Therefore, it would appear to be little more than a gift. As a gift does not typically constitute valid consideration, these gift tickets would not suffice to satisfy this element. Since there does not appear to be any bargained-for exchange between the parties, valid consideration does not exist. Therefore, no contractual agreement was made between the parties. Ed would not have any enforceable obligation to Alice.
II. ED AND OFFICER BROWN: ENFORCEABLE OBLIGATION?
As stated above, to determine if a valid enforceable obligation exists between these parties, it must first be determined if a valid enforceable contract exists. Also as stated above, this contract would also involve services, and as such, would be governed by the Common Law of contracts.
A. Mutual Assent. As stated above, mutual assent requires a valid offer and acceptance. Here, Ed made the same offer to Officer Brown (free car wash tomorrow) as he made to Alice. Additionally, Ed gave a similar response to Ed's offer, except in even stronger words: "I accept your kind offer." Therefore, it would appear that there are not problems with mutual assent. Nonetheless, as with Alice, Ed called Officer Brown the next morning and told him not to come to the car wash. Therefore, the Ed's offer [sic] was likely revoked prior to performance. Additionally, whether or not this is a valid enforceable agreement hinges on whether or not there is valid consideration between the parties.
B. Consideration. As stated above, valid consideration requires a bargained-for exchange between the parties; new legal detriment; and mutuality. Here, the Ed's consideration [sic] to Officer Brown consisted of his statement: "[I]f you drive by my house soon and make sure everything is OK I'll give you a free car wash tomorrow." On its face, this appears to be a valid bargained-for exchange. However, did this promise induce any new legal detriment?
1. Preexisting legal duty. For new legal detriment, a party must promise to do something he is not legally required to do, or promise NOT to do something he has a good-faith belief he has a right to do. Here, Officer Brown's consideration for Ed's promise to wash his car free consists in [sic] his driving by and making sure Ed's house was safe. However, this was already Officer Brown's legal duty; as a police officer, he is required to patrol Ed's house, and in fact, was "about to begin his job of patrolling Ed's neighborhood" when Ed made his offer. As this patrol was "routine," and something Officer
-3-
?????
Brown did "as always," this would not constitute new legal detriment. Therefore, valid consideration does not appear to exist, and Ed would not appear to have any enforceable obligation to Officer Brown.
III. ED AND CHARLIE: ENFORCEABLE OBLIGATION?
Also as stated above, there must first be a determination of a valid enforceable contract existing between the parties for an enforceable obligation to exist. And once again, as a services contract, the Common Law of contracts would govern.
A. Mutual Assent. Here, there do not appear to be any problems with mutual assent. Ed communicated his commitment to an identified offeree (Charlie), and this commitment contained definite terms (free car wash tomorrow at my new car wash). Likewise, Charlie unequivocally assented to his offer ("[T]hanks, I'll take you up on that") to Ed. The difference in this case scenario, however, is Ed's failure to properly revoke his offer. Unlike Alice and Officer Brown, whom Ed called the next morning and advised that he couldn't wash their cars, Charlie showed up the next day at the car wash. Which raises the question: [B]y showing up at the car wash, was Ed's offer to Charlie, then, irrevocable?
1. Equitable Option. Certain types of offers are not freely revocable. This occurs in situations where one of the contracting parties reasonably, foreseeably, and detrimentally relies on the other party's promise. Here, Charlie had left work and driven for one-half hour to get to Ed's car wash in response to Ed's offer. This resulted in Charlie losing time from work, paying money for gas, and driving twenty miles to Ed's car wash. This could have resulted in lost income to Charlie. Since they are neighbors, and thus since Ed presumably knows Charlie works, this detriment to Charlie was reasonably foreseeable. For Ed to attempt to revoke his offer while Charlie was in line waiting for his car wash should not be permitted to be a valid revocation. But was the offer, itself, supported by valid consideration?
B. Consideration. While it does not appear that valid consideration exists to enforce Ed's promise ( for the reasons stated above), there are some situations where a consideration substitute would be supplied by the courts. One such consideration substitute exists under the theory of promissory estoppel.
1. Promissory Estoppel. As stated above, Charlie detrimentally, reasonably and foreseeably relied on Ed's promise when he left work early and drove the twenty miles to get his car washed. In such a scenario, the court will allow the promise to be enforceable even when consideration does not otherwise appear to exist. Given this fact, coupled with the fact that Charlie was in fact waiting in line when Ed told him "I am not going to give you a free car wash" would tip the scales in Charlie's favor. Therefore, an enforceable obligation exists between Ed and Charlie for the free car wash.
-4-
?????
1)
Answer B to Question 1
?Governing Law - All Contracts - Common law will govern
The law which governs these purported contracts will be the common law. The UCC governs all contracts for sale of goods or future goods, while contracts, agreements, or promises for services such as a car wash, are governed by the common law.
Alice v. Ed
Alice and Ed do not have a legally enforceable agreement.
Formation
Formation of a contract requires (1) a valid offer, (2) a valid acceptance of the offer, (3) consideration or a substitute for consideration, and (4) a lack of valid defenses. These four elements create an enforceable obligation.
(1) Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent (present intent to enter into a bargain), communicated to the offeree in sufficiently clear and definite terms.
(a) Present intent/communicated to the offeree
Ed demonstrated present intent to make a gratuitous promise to Alice. However, because this is generally considered a consideration issue, the primary discussion of whether this offer is valid and whether an enforceable obligation has been created will be discussed under the heading "Consideration[.]"
(b) Terms
The terms of Ed's "offer" are:
Quantity - One (1)
Time - Any reasonable time the day after the offer Identity - Ed and Alice
Price - Free
Subject matter - Car Wash
The "offer" is valid.
(2) Acceptance
At Common law, acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Alice unequivocally assented by replying, "Thanks." Arguing from the circumstances, and customary American usage of the term, it is clear that Alice intended to "accept," or assent to, Ed's "offer."
-5-
????
(3) Consideration
Consideration is bargained[-]for exchange of legal benefit and detriment, which induces the parties to enter into the bargain[.]
(a) No consideration
Ed will argue that there was no consideration for his promise to give Alice a free car wash, because she was to give nothing in return.
(b) Condition to promise
Alice will argue first that the consideration for the promise was "[C]ome by my new car wash." Because Ed's promise was conditioned on this phrase, Alice will argue that it is consideration.
However, Ed will successfully reply that this is merely a "conditional gratuitous promise." A conditional gratuitous promise is a promise conditioned on some term, but which is nevertheless gratuitous and not sufficient for consideration[.] ("Come by my house tomorrow, and I'll give you my old TV set," is not valid consideration.)
(c) Return promise
Alice will next argue that her return promise to give Ed "a few extra tickets" to the game that night was sufficient consideration in return for his promise to give her a free car wash.
However, Ed will reply successfully that this was merely a gratuitous promise in return. The exchange was neither (1) bargained for, or (2) meant to induce the other's acceptance.
(d) Conclusion
There is no consideration for this agreement, and neither party may enforce the contract.
No discussion of defenses is needed, because no defenses apply, and with or without defenses, the contract is unenforceable.
Officer Brown v. Ed
Officer Brown will argue that a valid contract exists between Ed and him, bargained for and supported by consideration. However, Ed and Officer Brown do not have an enforceable contract.
Formation
Formation of a contract requires (1) a valid offer, (2) a valid acceptance of the offer, (3) consideration or a substitute for consideration, and (4) a lack of valid defenses. These four elements create an enforceable obligation.
(1) Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent (present intent to enter into a bargain), communicated to the offeree in sufficiently clear and definite terms.
-6-
???
(a) Outward Manifestation of present contractual intent/communicated to the offeree
Ed stated to Officer Brown that "[I]f you will drive by my house soon, and make sure everything is OK, I'll give you a free car wash tomorrow." [emphasis added.] Ed manifested present intent to enter into an agreement with Officer Brown.
(b) Terms
The terms of Ed's offer are:
Quantity - One (1) of each performance
Time - Any reasonable time the day after the offer
Identity - Ed and Officer Brown
Price - Exchange of performances
Subject matter - Car Wash provided to Officer Brown/Protection of house provided to Ed
The offer is valid.
(2) Acceptance
At Common law, acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Officer Brown unequivocally stated that "I accept your kind offer." Officer Brown manifested intent to enter into a contract with Ed, by manifesting unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
(3) Consideration
Consideration is bargained[-]for exchange of legal benefit and detriment, which induces the parties to enter into the bargain.
(a) No Consideration
Ed will argue that no consideration supports the agreement, because Officer Brown was under a preexisting legal duty to perform.
(b) Preexisting Legal Duty Rule
At common law, where one party has a preexisting legal duty to perform a certain obligation, a promise to perform that obligation as already obliged, is not sufficient consideration, on the theory that a party who agrees to perform a duty already owed is not changing his actions in any way.
Because Officer Brown "began his routine patrol, which, as always, promptly took him by Ed's house," and he made no effort to further secure the house than what he was legally obligated to the police department and city to do, Officer Brown's promised performance is not consideration.
-7-
???
(c) Conclusion
There is no consideration to support this agreement, and Ed's gratuitous promise may be retracted at any time.
No discussion of defenses is needed, because no defenses apply, and with or without defenses, the contract is unenforceable.
Charlie v Ed
Charlie will argue that a valid contract exists between Ed and him, bargained for and supported. Charlie and Ed may have an enforceable contract under the doctrine of promissory estoppel, or "detrimental reliance."
Formation
Formation of a contract requires (1) a valid offer, (2) a valid acceptance of the offer, (3) consideration or a substitute for consideration, and (4) a lack of valid defenses. These four elements create an enforceable obligation.
(1) Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent (present intent to enter into a bargain), communicated to the offeree in sufficiently clear and definite terms.
(a) Outward Manifestation of present contractual intent/communicated to the offeree
Ed stated to Charlie that "I'll give you a free car wash tomorrow." Ed manifested present intent to make a promise to Charlie. While this does not demonstrate present intent to enter into a bargain, it demonstrates an offer sufficient to warrant discussion of a consideration issue.
(b) Terms
The terms of Ed's "offer" are:
Quantity - One (1)
Time - Any reasonable time the day after the offer Identity - Ed and Charlie
Price - Free
Subject matter - Car Wash
The "offer" is valid.
(2) Acceptance
At Common law, acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. Charlie unequivocally replied, "Thanks, I'll take you up on that."
-8-
?????
(3) Consideration
Consideration is bargained[-]for exchange of legal benefit and detriment, which induces the parties to enter into the bargain[.]
(a) No Consideration
Ed will argue that no consideration supports the agreement because Charlie promised nothing in return, and nothing Charlie promised induced Ed or Charlie to enter into the contract.
(b) Promissory Estoppel - Restatement 90
At Common Law, the doctrine of promissory estoppel is available to act as a substitute for bargained[-]for consideration. Where it is foreseeable that a gratuitous promise will cause reliance of a substantial character on the part of the offeree, and such justifiable reliance of a substantial character on the part of the offeree, and such justifiable reliance does occur, the promise will be enforce[d] to the extent necessary to prevent injustice.
(i)Reliance of a Substantial Character
Charlie will argue that he replied on the promise by leaving work and driving for one half hour.
Depending on how much these two actions cost him (lack of pay, cost of gasoline, time invested), his reliance may be of a "substantial character.["]
(ii) Foreseeable Reliance
Ed may argue that Charlie's reliance was not foreseeable. However, Charlie stated, "Thanks, I'll take you up on that," and in doing so demonstrated to Ed that Ed should expect Charlie to rely on the offer in some way.
It is arguable whether reliance "of a substantial character" is foreseeable.
(iii) Sufficient Substitute?
It is arguable that either argument will succeed, and either may probably win depending on how a judge or jury decided to rule.
Conclusion
Alice and Officer Brown have no legal recourse against Ed.
Charlie may (or may not) have legal recourse in compensation for his detrimental reliance.
(c) Conclusion
There is no consideration to support this agreement, and Ed's gratuitous promise may be retracted at any time.
No discussion of defenses is needed, because no defenses apply, and with or without
-9-
??
defenses, the contract is unenforceable.
-10-

Question 2
Michael and his girlfriend Betty were going to an expensive nightclub. On their way to the club Betty asked Michael to stop by the store where she worked as a checker. Michael knew the store was closed but didn't question why she wanted to stop. When they arrived at the store they both got out of the car. Betty used her key to open the store's door. They both went in. Betty went to the cash register and took $200, intending to return it before the store opened the next day. Michael saw her take the money. They then left the store.
When they got outside Michael asked Betty why she took the $200 from the cash register. Betty told him that her employer owed her money and that she was taking it so that they could have fun that evening. Michael did not believe that Betty was entitled to take the money. Betty gave Michael the $200 and he put it in his pocket.
In fact, Betty was not entitled to take money from the cash register and she did not return the $200 the next day. The store's security system had filmed Betty's and Michael's actions and both Betty and Michael were arrested.
1. With what crime or crimes can Betty be reasonably charged and what defenses, if any, does Betty have available to her? Discuss.
2. With what crime or crimes can Michael be reasonably charged and what defenses, if any, does Michael have available to him? Discuss.
-11-

2)
Question 2 - Criminal Law Crimes against Betty
Answer A to Question 2
?Issue 1 - Can Betty be charged with Burglary?
Burglary in common law is the breaking and entering [into] the dwelling of another with the intent to commit a felony. Modern law has relaxed many of these elements. A breaking is no longer required, opening an unlocked door or window is sufficient. The building does not have to be a dwelling[;] it can be an office. And in some jurisdictions an intent to commit any crime including misdemeanors is sufficient.
Here we have Betty entering the locked store where she worked as a checker. While [she] did have access, she may not of [sic] been authorized to unlock the door and enter outside of normal working hours. If not, then she did commit the breaking and entry requirement element when she unlocked the door and entered the store. Under modern law, even though this is a store, it would be sufficient for the dwelling element. Finally, her taking the $200 which she intended to do would constitute a felony, larceny.
Betty has several defenses she can argue here. If the law in this jurisdiction follows the strict common law definition of burglary, the store is not a dwelling place[;] therefore this element is not satisfied and there is no burglary.
She can argue consent, by having a key and access to the store as an employee, she can argue that the owner has consented to her entering the store.
She can also argue that she had no intent to commit a felony. To do this she would have to convince the jury that she believed that the money was already owed to her and she was simply retrieving what was already hers.
Considering all of these facts she will be charged with burglary. Issue 2 - Can Betty be charged with Larceny?
Larceny is the trespassory taking of the personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive them of it.
Betty entered into the owner[']s store, and took $200 of the owner[']s money. Whether or not she intended to permanently deprive the owner of [it] will be determined by the jury[;] therefore the elements needed to charge Betty of Larceny are there in the facts.
She will argue that the money was owed to her and therefore she was entitled to retrieve
-12-

it, however the facts indicate that she was not entitled to the money.
She will also argue that there was no trespassory taking. Since she was authorized as an employee as a checker with a key to the store she was in legal possession of the money and therefore the trespassory taking element of Larceny is not satisfied.
Finally she can argue that she did not intent [sic] to permanently deprive the owner of the money. Here the facts are not as clear as to whether or not she intended to keep the money. The facts state that she did intend to return it, but again it[']s a matter for the jury to decide.
Most likely Betty will be charged with larceny.
Issue 3 - Can Betty be charged with Embezzlement?
Embezzlement is a larceny of personal property in which the actor is in legal possession of.
If Betty is allowed the defense in the larceny charge, of already being in possession of the money in the store due to her status as a checker and not simply a cleaning person or stocker, she can be charged with embezzlement, if it can be proven that after taking the money she intended to permanently deprive the owner of it.
Her defense here would be to show that she was going to return it and not permanently deprive the owner of it.
Issue 4 - Can Betty be charged with Larceny by continuing trespass?
Another option in larceny, if Betty did in fact did [sic] intend to return the money, however
she later decided to keep it, is to charge her with Larceny by continuing trespass.
Her defense here would be that she did in fact intend to return it and that between the taking and the time of her arrest there was insufficient time for her to do this.
Crimes against Michael
Issue 1 - Can Michael be charged with Accessory to the crime?
An accessory before the fact is one who helps or encourages another to commit a crime. An accessory after the fact is one who helps one, whom he knows has committed a crime, to keep from being arrested or prosecuted.
Here Michael drove Betty to the store when the store was closed[,] coupled with the fact that Betty took money he didn't believe belonged to her, it may be shown that he should have known she was committing a crime and he was helping her.
His defense [is] lack of intent to help[.]
-13-

Issue 2 - Can Michael be charged with Receiving stolen property?
Receiving stolen property is a crime when the actor[,] knowing that the personal property has been stolen, accepts the property into his possession with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of it.
He didn't believe the money belonged to [B]etty, therefore it must be stolen. He accepted the money and put it in his pocket, and he didn't return nor intend to return it, thereby intending to permanently deprive the owner of it.
Defenses -
Mistake in fact - no intent to permanently deprive the owner No knowledge that the money was stolen
-14-

2)
1. State v. Betty
Solicitation
Answer B to Question 2
????Requesting, urging or tempting another to commit a crime, with the specific intent that the solicitee commit a crime.
While Betty's asking Michael "to stop by the store where she worked as a checker" would be considered her requesting or urging him to commit a crime, since as discussed below, at that point she did not have the specific intent to commit any crime, or she was mistaken as to the actions she was taking, her asking Michael to come along would not be considered a solicitation.
Conspiracy
An agreement between two or more people to commit a crime with the specific intent that the crime be committed.
When Betty asked Michael to stop by the store where she worked, and Michael did so when he knew the store was closed and didn't question why she wanted to stop, this was not an agreement to commit a crime because (discussed infra) at this point Betty did not intend to commit any crime and Michael further did not agree to anything.
Thus, no conspiracy.
Burglary
A trespassory breaking and entering into the dwelling house of another, in the nighttime, with the specific intent to commit a felony therein.
When Betty stopped by the store that she worked as a checker on the way to the nightclub, and used her key to open the store's door, she did not commit a trespassory or wrongful entry, since as a checker, she had been entrusted with the keys. If Betty had the requisite mens rea for the crime of burglary (discussed below), the entering would have been considered wrongful by virtue of the fact that she entered by fraud, or for reasons not reasonable [sic] related to her employment. As such, the fact that Betty entered the store with her own keys even after store hours, would not constitute a wrongful entry. While we may reasonably infer that it was the nighttime since she and Michael were "going to an expensive night club", since the store is not a dwelling house used for sleeping purposes, common law burglary does not apply.
Statutory Burglary
Entry into any structure, at any time, with the specific intent to commit any crime or misdemeanor within.
-15-
???
Modernly, a burglary does not require that the structure be used for sleeping purposes. Because of this, entering into a store[,] at any time, would satisfy the structure requirement. However, since Betty went to the cash register and took $200 "intending to return it before the store opened the next day", she did not have the specific intent to commit a felony therein, namely the felony of larceny, since she did not intend to deprive the store of the money permanently.
Thus, Betty may not be charged with either common law or statutory burglary.
Larceny
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with the specific intent to permanently deprive, steal, or cause a substantial risk of loss to the owner.
When Betty went to the cash register and "took $200", she obtained control and dominion on the personal property of the store. Furthermore, when she left the store with the money, she committed asportation of the money. The money was the personal property of the store. However, since Betty told Michael that "her employer owed her the money and that she was taking it so that they could have fun that evening", she lacked the requis[i]te mental state for the crime of larceny as she did not have the specific intent to permanently deprive.
Wrongful Trespass Doctrine
Although Betty may not have had the specific intent to permanently deprive when she committed the actus reus, the physical act of removing the money from the store, under the Wrongful Trespass Doctrine, there need not be concurrence of actus reus and mens rea, if the mens rea is formed later. In this case, since Betty was actually "not entitled to take the money from the cash register and she did not return the $200 the next day["], there need not be the concurrence of physical and mental state and the court may deem Betty as guilty of larceny.
Thus, unless the court determines that the Wrongful Trespass Doctrine applies, Betty will not be charged with larceny.
Embezzlement
Wrongful conversion of property rightfully possessed, with the specific intent to permanently deprive or steal.
If the court believes Betty's assertion of her being owed the $200, she may have been in rightful possession of the $200 when she took it from the store. As such, when she "did not return the $200 the next day", she wrongfully converted the money at that point.
Thus, Betty may be charged with embezzlement.
-16-
???
Defenses
Mistake of Fact - reasonable
Mistake of fact will be a defense for specific intent crimes such as larceny and embezzlement, if the facts, as the defendant thought them to be, did not constitute a crime.
While Betty will attempt to invoke mistake of fact as a defense, since she thought that she was taking money that was owed to her, if she is charged with larceny, this may negate the mental state because it is not the crime of larceny to take property that rightfully belongs to you. However, this defense will not work for embezzlement since wrongfully converting property in one's rightful possession is a crime.
2. State v. Michael
Conspiracy defined above
Since Betty did not believe that she was committing a crime, there was no agreement by Michael to commit any crime.
Thus, Michael is not liable for conspiracy.
Accomplice
One who aids, counsels, or encourages another to commit a crime with the specific intent to aid that crime.
Once again, since Betty did not commit a burglary, and likely did not commit a larceny, Michael[']s driving her to the store would not constitu[t]e aid or encouragement. Even though intent may be found by what stake a person has in the outcome, and in this case Michael would benefit since Betty took $200 so that they could have fun, there was still no intent to help in committing the crime.
Accessory after the fact
Aiding another knowing that she has committed a felony, for the purpose of helping the defendant to escape arrest, trial or punishment.
When Michael did not believe the [sic] Betty was entitled to the money and when at that point he did not do anything to stop Betty from taking the money, and he did not notify the authorities, he may be charged with being an accessory after the fact. As such, he will not be liable for the underlying crimes of larceny and embezzlement committed by Betty.
Misprision
Concealment and non-disclosure of known felonious conduct of another.
When Michael knew that Betty had taken money that did not belong to her, and he did not
-17-
???????
tell the authorities or even tell her to stop, when he put it (the money) in his pocket, he concealed the known felonious conduct of Betty.
Receiving Stolen Property
Receiving control or possession over stolen property, knowing it to be stolen, with the specific intent to permanently deprive.
When after Betty told Michael that she was taking money that she felt was owed to her, and Michael "did not believe that Betty was entitled to the money", when he subsequently "put it in his pocket", he received control or possession over the money. Since they were planning on spending the money at the club, he specifically intended to permanently deprive the store of the money.
Defenses
Defenses
Mistake of fact defined above
While Michael will assert the defense of fact, the "fact" remains that he was not mistaken about any fact, and Betty, in truth, did commit the crimes that Michael thought she did, as is indicated by Betty's not being entitled to take the money and her not returning it the following day.
???-18-

Question 3
David drives a parcel delivery van. On Monday, while delivering packages in a residential neighborhood, David struck and badly damaged a parked car owned by Able. At the time of the collision, David was driving 30 mph. The posted speed limit for the street is 25 mph, but residents customarily drive at 30 mph.
On Tuesday, David left a package for Baker on the front step outside of her house. He placed the package just in front of the doorway, and when Baker walked out of her house later in the day, she tripped over the package, breaking her hip.
On Wednesday, while returning to his van following a delivery, David stopped to chat with Carl, who was sitting in his car and about to back out of his driveway. When they finished speaking, Carl began to back out of the driveway. At that moment, David saw a car speeding down the street towards Carl. David considered warning Carl of the approaching car, but since David was in a hurry, he decided not to go back and tell him. As Carl backed out of his driveway, he was struck by the speeding motorist and was seriously injured.
Able, Baker, and Carl have all filed lawsuits against David. What is David's liability to each of them? Discuss.
-19-

Answer A to Question 3
?3)
1. ABLE v. DAVID Negligence
???A duty to conform to a standard of care, the breach of which is the actual and proximate cause of plaintiff's damages.
Duty
Generally there is a duty to all foreseeable plaintiffs to act as a reasonable, prudent person under the circumstances.
Here, David is required [to] act as a reasonable, prudent delivery person driving in a residential neighborhood. He should be aware of parked cars and the possibility of hitting them. He has a duty to drive carefully.
Foreseeable Plaintiff
Since Able lives in the neighborhood and had his car parked there, he is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Breach
An unjustified failure to live up to the standard of care.
Here, David struck Able's parked car. The question is whether he was negligent and failed in his duty.
Negligence Per Se
If a statute has a penalty for its violation and proscribes the conduct expected and the statute is designed to prevent the type of harm caused by defendant and protect the class of plaintiff harmed by defendant, the statutory duty will be substituted for the common law duty. Its breach is negligence per se.
Here, David broke a speeding statute that proscribed an expected conduct of 25 mph (David was driving 30 mph). In addition, the statute would obviously have a penalty (a speeding ticket) and it is designed to protect persons or property owners that may be harmed by speeders (type of harm and class of plaintiffs).
????Therefore, David is negligent per se.
-20-

Causation
Actual Cause
"But for" David's speeding, Able's car would not have been damaged how and when it was.
Proximate Cause
David's speeding and hitting Able's car was foreseeable and there were no intervening events that would break the chain of causatio[n]. The damages flowed naturally from the car being hit.
Damages
General Damages (pain and suffering)
Here, there is no personal injury to Able.
Therefore, there is no recovery for pain and suffering.
Special Damages-Pecuniary losses
Here, Able will be able to recover for his property damages (his car was badly damaged). He will recover for any repairs or for total loss of car if that is the case.
Defenses
Comparative Negligence
A plaintiff's recovery will be reduced by his degree of fault. In some jurisdictions, the plaintiff will be barred from recovery unless his degree of fault is "less serious than" (49%) or[,] in others, "not more serious than" (50%) the defendant's fault.
Here, there is no indication that Able had any degree of fault. Therefore there will be no reduction in Able's recovery.
Contributory Negligence
In some jurisdictions, a plaintiff may be completely barred from recovery if he contributes in the least to the harm.
Here, there is no indication that Able contributed in the least to the accident. Therefore, there will be no reduction in his recovery.
Assumption of Risk
A plaintiff may be completely barred if he knowingly and voluntarily assumes the risk of the accident.
Here, there is no indication that Able knew of the risk to his car or voluntarily assumed it.
-21-
?????????
Therefore, his recovery will not be barred due to assumption of risk.
2. BAKER v. DAVID Negligence
Defined supra.
Duty
Defined supra.
Here, David had a duty to foreseeable plaintiffs to act as a reasonable, prudent delivery person.
Foreseeable Plaintiff
Here, since Baker is receiving a package from David and will be coming out of the house through that door, he is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Breach
An unjustified failure of defendant to conform his conduct to the duty owed.
Here, David acted unreasonably and without proper precaution. He should have anticipated that the resident, Baker, would be coming out the door and might not see the package that is "just in front of the doorway."
Therefore, David breached his duty owed to Baker.
Causation
Actual Cause
"But for" David's placing the package "just in front of the doorway", Baker would not have been injured (broken her hip) as when and how she was.
Proximate Cause
It was foreseeable that someone coming through that door would not see the package and would trip over it and be injured (such as breaking a hip). There were no intervening events between David's placing the package in front of the door and Baker's tripping that would break the chain of causation. There was no superseding event.
Damages General Damages Defined supra.
Here, Baker broke her hip. This must have been very painful and she will suffer through a period of rehabilitation. Depending on her age, she may even need a hip replacemen[t] (further suffering.)
Special Damages
???????????-22-

Defined supra.
Here, Baker will need medical attention. She may also lose time from work (lost wages) and suffer other pecuniary losses.
Therefore, Baker will recover for her pecuniary losses.
Defenses
Comparative negligence Defined supra.
Here, there is no indication that Baker had any degree of fault. Although David may claim that Baker should have looked where he was going, the facts do not indicate that Baker was unreasonable or imprudent in his actions under the circumstances.
Therefore, there will be no reduction in her recovery.
Contributory Negligence Defined supra.
As stated above there is no indication that Baker had any degree of fault. Therefore, she will not be barred from recovery.
Assumption of Risk Defined supra.
There is no indication that Baker voluntarily assumed and [sic] known risk.
Damages
Damages and defenses will be as discussed above under negligence.
3. CARL v. David Negligence Defined supra.
Duty
Defined supra.
A duty is owed if there is some relationship that requires a duty (such as parent to child or between spouses) or by contract, or by statute or[,] if there is an assumption of care or a creation of peril. This is especially true in an act of omission.
Here,therewasanactofomissionbyDavid(didn'twarnCarl). However,Daviddidnotowe Carl a duty. The facts do not indicate he was related to Carl, that he had any contractual duty to warn Carl, or that there was a statute that required him to do so. In addition, David
????????-23-

did not create the peril (didn't cause the speeding car) and did not assume any care of Carl which he then abandoned (he did not prevent others from helping Carl).
Therefore, David will have no liability as to Carl.
-24-

3)
Negligence
Answer B to Question 3
??Negligence is a failure to execute that degree of care a reasonable person would exercise in the same or similar circumstances[.]
Able v. David
A plaintiff () in a negligence action must establish as a prima facie case: duty, breach, causation actual and proximate, and damages.
1. Duty
Generally one does not owe any duty to another, but duty can arise by statute, contract, assumption, relationship or peril.
Under Palsgraf, Cardozo argued that where duty arises from peril a defendant's action can put a  in peril if he () is foreseeable and in the zone of danger. Andrews argued if there was a duty to any one there was a duty to all[.]
Here David has placed A. in peril because he is driving a van and A's car is parked on a street in the zone of danger where D's van is likely to be driving[.] Therefore, D owes a duty of reasonable care to A and his property.
2. Breach - Did D breach his duty to A?
Breach is a failure to exercise reasonable care. Where there is a statute usually safety related - that has been violated it is negligence per se. A statute must:
1. be clearly defined
2. the  must be in a class intended to be protected by the statute
3. the harm done was that type that the statute included be present
4. the D. was not excused by necessity
Here there is presumably a speeding statute because there is a posted speed limit of 25 mph. The , A[,] is clearly in the protected class because his auto is subject to accident from speeding cars. The harm (vehicle damage) was what [the] statute intended to protect and D had no legitimate excuse. Therefore D has breached his duty to A.
3. Causation - Actual
Actual causation means that "but for" the D's act,  would not have suffered damage. Here but for D's striking A's car A would not have been damaged[.]
???-25-

Proximate Cause means that defendant's acts were not so far removed in time or space and were direct and foreseeable that the law would impose liability for  damage.
Here D's driving and striking A's car was the direct cause, unbroken by any intervening event, that caused A's car to be damaged.
Therefore the causation element has been satisfied[.]
4. Damages
A has suffered actual damages because his car was "struck and badly damaged."
5. Contributory/Comparative Negligence
Where a 's negligence contributes to his injuries he can be barred from recovery in a strictly contributory neg. jurisdiction or have his recovery reduced in proportion to his own negligence.
Here there is no evidence from the facts that A had carelessly parked the car[.] Therefore D probably could not raise this Defense[.]
Baker v. D
1. Did D owe a duty to Baker[?]
D has placed B in peril by his act because he's placing the package is [sic] in the zone of danger of where B is likely to be and it is foreseeable that B would be walking out his front door.
2. Breach -
D's failure to act with reasonable care by placing the packages just in front of the doorway instead of off to the side would probably breach his duty to B[.]
3. Cause - Actual
"But for" the package being in front of the door B would not have tripped over it[.]
The package is the direct cause of B's tripping[,] therefore it is the proximate cause[.]
4. Damages
B has suffered damages because she "broke her hip[.]"
5. Contrib. Negligence (C/N)
defined above - Here it is arguable that B was negligent in not looking around before walking out the door[.] Therefore her damages could be barred or reduced depending on the jurisdiction[.]
Carl v. D
There is no affirmative duty to act so D would not be liable to Carl for failing to warn him of
?????-26-

the car. If[,] however[,] there were a special relationship (i.e. child) there would be a duty[.]
Conclusion
D is liable in a negligence action to A[.]
D is probably liable on a pro rata basis to B[.] D is not liable to C[.]
?-27-

Question 4
GravelCo is a distributor of high quality gravel used on construction projects. In August, GravelCo found itself with more gravel than it could easily store. On August 15, GravelCo's sales director sent a fax on company stationary with GravelCo's logo at the top and the sales director's name printed just beneath it to Builder, GravelCo's biggest customer. The entire text of the fax stated, "Because of an oversupply, we are offering to sell up to 5000 tons of high-quality gravel at $8 per ton, full payment due on delivery. We can guarantee this price for only thirty days."
On August 17, the purchasing agent for Builder faxed back a response stating, "We do not wish to order at $8 per ton, but would consider a purchase at $7 per ton."
On September 1, a railroad strike caused a gravel shortage and an immediate rise in the market price for gravel. On September 5, GravelCo entered into several contracts with major contractors to sell large quantities of gravel at $11 a ton.
On September 7, GravelCo received an overnight letter from Builder signed by its purchasing agent. The letter stated, "We accept your offer for 5000 tons of gravel at $8 per ton. Terms attached." Attached to the letter was Builder's standard purchase order form, one of the terms of which stated that payment would be made within 90 days after delivery of the purchased product.
In order to deliver 5000 tons of gravel to Builder, GravelCo would now be forced to purchase some of the gravel on the open market at over $10 a ton.
1. Is GravelCo obligated to sell 5000 tons of gravel to Builder at $8 per ton? Discuss.
2. If GravelCo is bound to sell the gravel to Builder, can Builder be required to make full payment upon delivery? Discuss.
-28-

4)
Answer A to Question 4
?Since this question involves the sale of goods it will be governed by the UCC.
Is Gravelco obligated? Gravelco would be obligated to sell Builder 5000 tons of gravel at $8 per pound if there was an enforceable contract in place. The formation of any contract requires mutual assent (valid offer and acceptance) supported by consideration with no legal defenses.
Gravelco's Offer: A valid offer is manifestation of a willingness to be bound which is communicated by the offeror to the offeree, contains all the essential terms (product, price, time for performance [,] etc[.] and creates the power of acceptance in the offeree. Here Gravelco's sales director sent Builder a signed, written offer stating all of the essential terms (gravel, for $8 per ton, payment due on delivery and good for 30 days). This would constitute a valid offer[.]
Builder's rejection: A valid acceptance occurs if the offeree communicates his acceptance of the terms of the offer to the offeror, in the manner and time frame specified by the offeror[;] however, in its first communication Builder replied back to Gravelco stating that they "did not wish to order at $8 per ton but would consider a purchase at $7 per ton.["] Builder did not accept the terms in Gravelco's offer and in fact rejected those terms and made a counteroffer of $7 per ton. No contract was formed because Builder did not accept the offer.
Builder's acceptance: See rule above. In its 2nd communication, Builder sent a signed letter and purchase order to Gravelco stating that they accepted their offer for 5000 tons at $8 per ton and that payment would be made within 90 days of delivery. The issue is whether or not the offer was still open at the time of acceptance.
Merchant's firm offer rule: Under the UCC a merchant[']s firm offer is valid for up to 90 days if in writing and signed by the merchant. Here, we know that Gravelco's offer was in writing (although it's not clear if it was signed it will likely qualify because the sales director[']s name was printed and it was on company letterhead). In the offer, Gravelco expressly stated that the offer was only open for 30 days so Builder would have needed to respond within that time frame. The letter from Gravelco was sent on August 15th and Buildco responded on Sept. 7th that they accept[ed] the offer so they were within the 30 day limit.
The issue is whether or not the offer was terminated by Builder's rejection on August 17th. An offer is terminated if it is rejected by the offeree. Here Builder clearly stated that they did not "wish to place an order at $8 per ton". That would constitute a rejection of the offer. Had they said that they were not sure if they wanted to make a purchase then Gravelco would be obligated to hold the offer open for 30 days. The offer was no longer valid at the time of [B]uilder's acceptance.
???-29-

Defenses to the contract:
If for some reason it is determined that the offer was still open at the time of Builder's acceptance, Gravelco might be able to defend based on impracticability. Impracticability can come into play where some unforeseeable, intervening event makes performance extremely difficult (although technically possible) and where neither party assumed the risk. Here we know that there was a railroad strike [that] created a gravel shortage and caused an immediate rise in the market price of gravel. Generally a market increase in price will not be considered an unforeseeable event but the fact that it was a railroad strike that caused it might allow Gravelco to make that argument. However, if Gravelco should have been aware that there was the possibility of a railroad strike that would impact the cost of gravel they will not be able to establish impracticability as a defense to the contract.
Payment Terms: Again, if for some reason it is determined that the offer was still open at the time of Builder's acceptance then the issue is when Builder is obligated to pay for the gravel. Gravelco's original offer stated that payment was due upon delivery and Builder's acceptance stated that payment would be made in 90 days from delivery.
Battle of the forms: Under the UCC when both parties are merchants as is the case here and there are additional terms both parties['] terms will be included in the agreement. However, where there are conflicting terms the conflicting term (net 90 [day] payment terms) must be agreed to. However, courts can look to a course of dealings between the two companies to determine if there is implied agreement on the term. Here we know that Gravelco and Builder had done business in the past and, in fact, Builder was Gravelco's biggest customer. If[,] historically, Builder has paid in 90 days and Gravelco has never objected previously then Buildco's payment is due in 90 days.
?-30-

4)
Answer B to Question 4
?GRAVEL CO. (G) vs. BUILDER (B)
Is Gravel Co. obligated to Sell 5000 tons @ $8 per ton?
A contract is a promise or set of promises the performance of which the law will treat as a duty and for the breach of which the law will remedy. The rights and remedies available to the parties depend on whether a valid contract existed. Every contract is based on Offer, Acceptance & Consideration.
UCC or Common Law?
The UCC governs contracts for the sale of goods (movable, tangible items identifiable at the time of the contract)[;] otherwise common law governs.
Here, G&B contracted for the sale of gravel, which is a movable and tangible good.
Therefore, the UCC, Article 2 governs.
MERCHANTS
Under the UCC, a merchant is one who regularly deals with or holds out as [being] knowledg[e]able in the goods of the contract[.]
G is a distributor of gravel and as such is knowledg[e]able in gravel. B is ordering 5000 tons of gravel, which shows B is also knowledg[e]able in gravel.
Therefore, B&G are Merchants and will be held to merchandise standards under the UCC.
Firm Offer - UCC2-205?
Under UCC2-205, a firm offer is a signed, written offer by a merchant which holds itself open for a stated time (not to exceed 90 days). A firm offer is irrevocable for the stated time. Unlike common law options, no consideration is required for a firm offer.
Here, G made a written offer to B which was held open because it said G would sell 5000 tons of gravel to B and would guarantee the price for 30 days. This was from a merchant because G is a merchant.
G will argue the offer isn't signed, and therefore can't be a UCC2-205 firm offer.
B will argue G's logo at the top of the fax, and the sales director's name at the bottom are
?????-31-

sufficient to meet the signature requirement. Therefore, G made a Firm Offer under UCC2-205. OFFER by G
An offer is a communication of present contractual intent which a reasonably objective person understands assent would form a bargain. Under the UCC, the offer must be clear and definite as to quantity and parties[;] the other terms can be replaced by UCC gap fillers.
G made a communication of contractual intent to B because G offered to sell gravel to B. A reasonable person would understand assent would form a bargain because B could accept within 30 days. The UCC requirements for clear quantity - 5000 tons and parties - B&G are met.
Therefore, G made a valid offer[;] this was an irrevocable firm offer as discussed above[.] Rejection by B on 8/17?
A rejection is a statement by the offeree they do not accept the offer. A counteroffer is an implied rejection.
G may argue B's fax on 8/17 was a rejection because it stated "we do not wish to purchase at $8/ton." B will argue the language in their fax was vague, and merely a statement of their "wish", not contractual intent. B can further argue a reasonable person reading the fax wouldn't understand it was a rejection because B's statement was only a "wish."
Therefore, B did not reject G's firm offer. Acceptance by B on Sept. 7?
Under UCC2-206, an acceptance can be made by any reasonable means after a reasonable time. Quantity and Parties must be clear and definite.
B can show they accepted G's offer because they stated in the 9/7 letter "We accept your offer[.]"
Quantity & Parties are clear and definite - 5000 tons and G&B.
B can show they accepted by reasonable means - letter, in a reasonable time - within the 30 days mentioned by G.
B's acceptance did contain terms which differed from G's offer. However, under UCC2-207, a seasonable expression of acceptance with varying terms can be effective. The varying terms may be objected to by the offeror.
???-32-

Therefore, B made a valid acceptance for 5000 tons of gravel at $8/ton. STATUTE OF FRAUDS - UCC2-201
The UCC2-201 requires contracts for the sale of goods over $500 in value must be in writing, signed by the party against whom it is to be enforced.
Here, G sent B a fax with the terms of the contract with company logo & a sales director's name. B sent a signed letter accepting G's offer[.]
Therefore, the UCC2-201 writing requirement is met.
CONSIDERATION
B gave G a promise to pay $8/ton in exchange for G's shipment of gravel.
Therefore, a valid exchange of legal detriment can be shown because both parties must give performance in exchange for return performance.
Therefore, a valid contract exists based on offer, acceptance and consideration.
FRUSTRATION OF PURPOSE
Frustration of purpose excuses performance when an essential purpose for the contract (known to both parties) becomes an implied condition and is frustrated by unforeseeable events beyond the parties['] control.
Here, G may argue the unexpected rise in gravel prices and the sale by G to other distributors frustrated the purpose of the contract. G will argue B&G knew the reason for the contract's existence was G's oversupply because G said to B "because of an oversupply...." in their original offer. This oversupply was frustrated when G sold the gravel elsewhere.
B can argue G's frustration was within their control because they didn't have to sell to other parties.
Therefore, because G could control its oversupply by not selling to other parties, B can show frustration or purpose doesn't apply.
IMPOSSIBILITY/COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY?
A party is excused from performance when events beyond their control make performance objectively impossible or extremely commercially impractical.
B will argue G had control over keeping the gravel and shouldn't be excused from performance because G sold the gravel elsewhere. Also, B will argue it isn't objectively
????-33-

impossible for G to perform because they can still ship gravel to B, even if it is more expensive.
Therefore, G cannot assert impossibility or commercial impracticability.
Therefore, for the facts and legal reasoning discussed, G is obligated to sell 5000 tons of gravel at $8/ton because G & B had a valid, enforceable contract.
 Can G require B [to] make full payment upon delivery?
UCC2-207 - ACCEPTANCE varying from OFFER
As previously mentioned, an Acceptance which is a seasonable expression of acceptance can contain varying terms from the offer provided the acceptance is between merchants and: The offer doesn't expressly limit itself to its terms  The offeror doesn't object to the new terms The acceptance isn't conditioned upon accepting the new terms and  The new terms don't materially affect the offer.
Here, G will argue the term B changed regarding payment after 90 days materially altered the offer because it changed when G was to be paid.
Using the Knockout Rule, the court would likely knock out the varying term and replace it with a UCC Gap Filler. Or the court can enforce G's original term regarding payment made due on delivery.
Therefore, G may be able to require immediate payment, or the court will knock out the contradicting terms and replace with a reasonable UCC Gap Filler.
??-34-



ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2006 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2006 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Torts 1 Contracts 13 Criminal Law 24 Torts 36
???
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?
Question 1
A state statute requires motorcyclists to wear a safety helmet while riding, and is enforced by means of citations and fines. Having mislaid his helmet, Adam jumped on his motorcycle without one and went riding down the street. Barb, who was driving her car in the opposite direction on the same street, briefly looked down to get her sunglasses, which had dropped to the floor. At that moment a bee landed on Adam's head. In attempting to brush it away, he lost control of the motorcycle. The motorcycle fell and went sliding over the double line into Barb's lane with Adam pinned beneath it. When Barb retrieved her sunglasses and looked ahead, she saw that the motorcycle was sliding towards her, going the wrong way in her lane. She abruptly turned her wheel to avoid hitting it, crossed over the double line, and collided head-on with a truck that was approaching her at twice the posted speed limit. The truck, owned and driven by Dave, was badly damaged in the collision, as was Barb's car. Barb was seriously injured when the force of the collision threw her against her own seat belt, breaking her sternum.
On what theory or theories might damages be recovered, and what defenses might reasonably be raised in actions by:
1. Barb against Adam? Discuss. 2. Barb against Dave? Discuss.
-1-

?Q-1
Barb v. Adam
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
Torts
?Negligence Per Se - See under Breach. (defined intra) Crossing the double line - excusable
NEGLIGENCE
Negligence where a duty is owed and that duty is breached and that breach is the actual and proximate cause of plaintiff[']s damages.
Here Barb will argue that Adam owed her a general duty of due care to act as a reasonable person and prevent foreseeable harm or injury by driving in a safe and appropriate manner. Moreover[,] Barb will assert that Adam owed a duty to follow the rules of the road.
Breach
Because Adam failed to wear his helmet[,] Barb will argue Negligence Per Se[;] a violation of statute in California creates a rebuttable presumption of negligence.
A state statute required a motorcyclist to wear a safety helmet while riding. The intent of the legislature was to protect the motorcyclist from head injures from accidents. Adam is a motorcyclist. Here the legislat[ion] intended to protect him[,] not Barb. The classification is motorcyclist which Adam not Barb is. The type of injury is a head injury of a motorcyclist and passenger.
There is no negligence per se as it is not the type of injury ("a bee sting") the legislature is trying to prevent.
Barb will argue that Adam failed to control his motorcycle and he owed her a foreseeable general duty of due care as a motorcyclist to stay on the appropriate side of the road. Adam[,] after being landed on by a bee[,] brushed it away and lost control of his vehicle, breaching his duty of due care to drive safely and to maintain control of his bike and drive on his side of the road. Adam lost control of the bike[,] fell and skidded over the double line[,] a violation of statute[,] causing Barb to swerve and strike Dave[']s truck. It is the intent of the legislator to protect other motorist[s] from injury[.] Both are motorists and suffer the type of injury injuring herself and Dave's property.
?There is a breach.
-2-

Causation Actual Causation
But for Adam loosing [sic] control of his bike and crossing the double line[,] Barb would not have been injured. Adam is a substantial factor of her injuries.
There is actual causation.
Proximate Causation
It is foreseeable that when one loses control of a motorcycle and fails to (not cross) the double lines[,] which is a violation of statute negligence per se[,] that it would cause Barb to swerve in avoidance of striking Adam and his bike causing an accident with Dave. Adam was the proximate cause of her accident[.]
There is proximate causation. Damages
Barb suffered personal injury of a broken sternum and was seriously injured. Her car was bad[l]y damaged[.]
Defenses
Contributory Negligence
When a plaintiff has a responsibility to act with conduct of a certain standard and fails to hold at or above that level of conduct and contributes to his or her own injury.
Here, Adam will argue that Barb[']s own negligence caused her injuries. Barb by looking down at the floor to get her sunglasses placed herself in jeopardy of accident[.] Here Barb failed to hold to the conduct required of drivers to drive safely and keep the[ir] eyes on the road.
Barb will argue it is normal to avert eyes [on] dropping.
There is contribut[or]y negligence. In some states it is a Complete Bar to Recovery. Comparative Negligence
Comparative negligence is an appointment of fault and will affect the recovery of the parties depe[n]d[in]g on the type of comparative negligence the[re] must be under 50% in order to recover.
-3-
???????
Adam will assert: By swerving and crossing into Dave[']s path here Barb looked at the floor and averted her eyes from the road. Barb has a percentage of fault in the accident. Barb will argue it was brief and would not have mattered. The courts will decide if there is comparative negligence.
This is comparative negligence. Assumption of the Risk
Knowing the dangers and being fully aware and accept[in]g the risk is a defense under Assumption of the Risk[.]
Here Adam will argue that Barb drove know[in]g there are dangers out on the road and the[re] are accidents that happens[sic][.] She had full and complete knowledge.
Barb will counter that she was unaware of Adam[']s bee incident and who knows when an accident will occur? She could not have complete knowledge.
There is no assumption of the risk based on Barb's lack of knowledge and accepta[n]ce of Adam's driv[in]g skills.
Damages/Remedies General Damages
Barb will seek to recover her past[,] present[,] and future pay and suffering[.] In some states she may recover economic loss of her car. (May reduce future to recover).
Special Damages
Barb will seek to recover any certain and foreseeable losses related to her lost wages [and] medical bills. (provable expenses)
Nominals
To assert plaintiff[']s rights
There will be no nominals because of the type of accident. If there is it will be small. Punitive Damages
To punish for malicious or wantonly reckless or intentional behavior.
There will be no punitives unless there is wanton recklessness.
-4-
?
As there appears to be joint tortfeasance[,] Dave speed[in]g and Adam recklessness[,] she may seek dam[a]ges from both. However[,] her total damages may not exceed the amount by collecting each successive tortfeasor[;] may seek injury from each other or contributions.
Barb v. Dave Negligence per se Defined supra.
Here, Dave violated the posted speed limit. Under negligence per se the legislature intended the speed limit to protect from car accidents. The type of injury intended to prevent to motorists Dave & Barb, both parties with the characteristics of parties injured. Here Dave may be found to have created a rebuttable presumption of neglige[nc]e under CA law.
There is neglige[nc]e per se.
Dave will assert that Barb crossed the line and struck him. His speed would not matter and for severity of injury, not causing the accident.
Duty
Defined supra.
Here Barb will assert that Dave owed a general duty of due care to drive within the speed limit. A reasonable driver would foresee that speeding may cause serious injuries and inability to avoid accidents.
Breach
Defined supra.
Here Dave drove at twice the speed limit. A reasonable person would foresee that speed[in]g would breach a general duty of due care to other drivers like Barb. Dave breached his duty and the neglige[n]ce per se created a rebuttable presumption of negligence, violating the speed limit.
Dave will assert that speeding limit [sic] was designed to control avoidable accidents and that Barb swervy[sic] over the double line, here she created the accident and breached her duty to Dave.
-5-

Actual Causation
But for Dave violat[in]g the speed limit Barb would not have been severely injured in the head[-]on collision[.] Dave is a substantial factor in Barb's injures.
There is Actual Causation[.] Proximate Causation
It is reasonably forseeable that Dave[']s speeding was the legal and proximate cause of Barb[']s severe injuries.
There is proximate causation. Damages
Defined supra.
Defenses
Contribut[or]y Neglige[nc]e
Defined Supra
Dave will argue that Barb crossed th[e] double lines and that she contributed to her own injures by fail[in]g to keep her eyes on the road and swer[vi]ng to avoid [w]recking by en[ter]ing into an oncoming lane & crossing double lines. A driver owes a conduct of due care to stay in her lane and drive defensively with their eyes on the road. Barb failed to do this and contributed to her accident.
There is contributory negligence.
Comparative Negligence
Defined Supra.
Here Barb contributed to her injuries defined infra in contribut[or]y negligence. There is comparative negligence.
Last Clear Chance.
Barb will argue in her defense that Dave had [the] last clear chance to avoid the accident but failed to do so because he was speeding.
-6-

There is no Last Clear Chance.
Ass[u]mpti[on] of the risk
Defined Infra
There is not assumption of the risk. Dave did not know Barb would have an accident and not give up her offer.
Generals Defined supra.
Barb may recover general damages for her suff[er]i[n]g past present and future reduced for Adam.
Specials Defined supra. Several Defined supra. Punitives Defined supra.
-7-

Q-1
1. BARB v. ADAM NEGLIGENCE
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
???Duty to conform to a standard of care and breach of duty is the actual and proximate cause of plaintiff[']s damages.
DUTY
FORESEEABLE PLAINTIFF
Here, Barb was driving on a road shared by fellow motorists including Adam, which puts her in the zone of danger should Adam not drive safely. Therefore Barb is a foreseeable plaintiff.
STANDARD OF CARE
Under these circumstances, Adam had a duty to act as a reasonably prudent driver while sharing the road with other drivers.
BREACH
Where the defendant's conduct falls short of the required standard of care applicable and owed to plaintiff.
Here, Adam's conduct of brushing away a bee from his head jeopardized the safety of Barb, which fell short of a reasonably prudent driver.
VIOLATION OF STATUTE
Where the[re] is a statute [of] specific duty, it replaces the more general standard of care and a violation of such statute establishes a brea[c]h.
Here, Adam violated the state statute by not wearing a safety helmet while driving a motorcycle.
The statute[,] enforced by means of citations and fines, clearly establishes a criminal penal[t]y. Further, the statute clearly defined the conduct required as wearing a safety helmet while driving a motorcycle. However, the statute-specific duty was not established to protect fellow motorists such as Joan. Rather, the statute was designed to protect the driver of the motorcyclist [sic].
-8-
?????
Therefore, Adam's violation of statute does not establish a brea[c]h. Adam did, however, breach the more general duty owed to Barb (defined/discussed supra.)
CAUSATION ACTUAL CAUSE
But for Adam attempting to brush away a bee and losing control of his motorcycle, Barb would not have been injured how and when she was.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
When a bee landed on Adam's head and he attempted to brush it away, it was foreseeable that he could lose control of his motorcycle. Between Adam's act of brushing away the bee and losing control of his motorcycle there were no intervening events to break the chain of causation leading to Barb's collision with Dave.
DAMAGES GENERAL DAMAGES
Barb will be entitled to general damages for any pain and suffering caused by Adam's act of sliding into her lane[,] resulting in her attempt to avoid a collision with him.
SPECIAL DAMAGES
Barb will be entitled to special damages for any medical bills as a result of her broken sternum and any other injuries caused by this collision. Also, Barb is entitled to special damages for any lost wages.
PROPERTY DAMAGES
Barb is entitled to the cost to repair her car of [sic] the reasonable value of her car if it was totally destroyed.
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Here, if the court determines that Barb's conduct fell short of a reasonably prudent driver by briefing [sic] looking down to get her sunglasses that had dropped to the floor, this would be a total bar to recovery in contributory negligence jurisdictions.
-9-
?????????
LAST CLEAR CHANCE DOCTRINE
However, an exception would be made if Adam was found to have had the last clear chance to avoid the accident.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
In comparative negligence jurisdiction's [sic] Barb and Adam's percentage of degree of fault would be determined and damages would be paid accordingly.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Barb did not willingly, knowingly or unreasonably assume any risk by sharing the road with Adam as she had no way to know a bee would land on Adam's head[,] causing him to swerve into her lane.
JOINT & SEVERAL LIABILITY
On these facts, Adam and Dave will be joint and severally liable for Barb's injuries[;] therefore, both are responsible for her total damages.
CONTRIBUTION
Adam may also seek contribution from Dave if he pays more damages than he was required.
2. BARB v. DAVE
NEGLIGENCE
Defined supra.
DUTY
FORESEEABLE PLAINTIFF
Because Barb shared the road with Dave, she was in the zone of danger should Dave's driving put her at risk. Therefore, Barb is a foreseeable plaintiff.
STANDARD OF CARE
Here, Dave had a duty to drive as a reasonably prudent driver under the circumstances of sharing the road with fellow drivers.
-10-
??????????
BREACH Defined supra.
Here, when Dave drove twice the posted speed limit[,] putting his fellow drivers[,] including Barb[,] at risk, he breached his duty.
VIOLATION OF STATUTE
Defined supra.
Here, a statute established a criminal penalty for speeding. Further, a statute clearly defined conduct expected as half the speed Dave was driving. And finally, the statute was designed to protect both Dave and fellow drivers such as Barb. Therefore, Barb was part of the class sought to protect.
Dave has violated a statute and breached his standard of care owed to Barb.
CAUSATION
ACTUAL CAUSE
But for Dave driving at twice the speed limited [sic], Barb would not have been injured how and when she was.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Barb's injuries were a for[e]seeable result of Dave speeding and colliding with Barb. Adam's act of sliding into Barb's lane is not an intervening act to break the chain of causation.
Therefore, Dave is the actual and proximate cause of Barb's injuries. DAMAGES
GENERAL DAMAGES
Barb is entitled to general damages for pain & suffering caused by this accident. SPECIAL DAMAGES
Barb is entitled to special damages for her medical bills for her injuries including a broken sternum. Sue is also entitled to special damages for lost wages.
-11-
????????
PROPERTY DAMAGES
Defined & discussed supra.
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Defined & discussed supra.
LAST CLEAR CHANCE DOCTRINE
If the court finds that Dave had the last clear chance to avoid his collision with Barb, Barb will not be barred from recovery if she is found to have contributed to her injuries.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
Barb & Dave's degree of fault will be determined by percentages and damages paid accordingly.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Here, Barb did not knowingly[,] willingly or unreasonably assume any risk by sharing a road with Dave.
Assumption of the risk does not apply. JOINT & SEVERAL LIABILITY Defined/discussed supra. CONTRIBUTION
Dave may seek contribution from Adam[,] reimbursement for any damages Dave pays above what he is liable [for].
????????-12-

Question 2
CapCo sells baseball caps to youth leagues and recently approached two new teams, the Bears and the Lions. Uncertain how many caps the team would require, the Bears' team manager signed a written contract that included the following:
"The Bears will purchase all baseball caps needed for the 2006 season (approximately 75-100 caps) from CapCo @ $7.50 per cap. All modifications to this contract must be in writing to be enforceable."
When the Bears team manager subsequently placed the baseball cap order with CapCo, he informed CapCo that fewer kids had signed up than had been expected, and, consequently, the Bears needed only 50 caps. CapCo responded that such small orders generated less profit and would accordingly trigger a higher price of $8.50 per cap. The Bears team manager orally agreed to that higher price.
CapCo also contacted the Lions, whose team manager was considering several baseball cap suppliers. CapCo sent the Lions manager a letter that stated: "I can offer you a special deal for a limited time. CapCo will provide 100 caps @ $2.50 per cap, delivery within one week."
Upon seeing CapCo's letter, the Lions manager was excited about the proposed contract price and immediately mailed her acceptance to CapCo. Before receiving the Lions manager's response, CapCo realized that its offer contained a clerical error-the price was supposed to be $6.50, not $2.50, per cap. CapCo immediately telephoned the Lions manager and informed her of the clerical error.
The Bears refuse to pay $8.50 instead of $7.50 for each of the 50 caps. CapCo contends that the Bears must order at least 75 caps to obtain the $7.50 per cap price. The Lions want to enforce the $2.50 per cap price.
1. If CapCo files a lawsuit against the Bears seeking damages for breach of contract, who is likely to prevail? Discuss.
2. If the Lions file a lawsuit seeking to enforce the contract price of $2.50 per baseball cap, who is likely to prevail? Discuss.
-13-

2)
CapCo v. Bears
Governing law
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
??As this contract involves the sale of baseball caps, which are items identified as movable at contract formation, the UCC will govern.
A valid contract requires mutual assent (offer and acceptance), consideration, and the absence of defenses.
Offer
An offer is a manifestation of present intent to contract, communicated to an offeree with sufficient certainty that the other party would reasonably believe that his or her assent would form a bargain. Here, we have a written contract between the Bears and CapCo for a requirements/output contract. The only formation issue is whether there was sufficient certainty in this contract that a court could provide a remedy. Under the UCC, the essential terms are parties and quantity. Under this contract, only a statement estimate is provided (75-100 caps). However, the facts indicate that this is an output/requirements contract by use of the phrase "purchase all baseball caps needed for the 2006 season." Under the UCC, as long as the parties act in good faith, and do not increase in disproportionate amounts, nor decrease in bad faith, a quantity term will be implied by the course of performance.
Acceptance
Acceptance is a manifestation of assent to the terms of the offer, made in a manner required by the offer. Here, since we have a written contract, a valid acceptance is made.
Consideration
Consideration is a bargained[-]for exchange in which each party suffers some legal detriment. Here, we have a contract for the purchase and sale of goods, so the exchange and legal detriment elements appear to be met.
Illusory promise? - An illusory promise only has the appearance of binding a party. However, under the UCC, the duty of good faith will satisfy the consideration element. In addition, under the UCC the parties have an implied promise of good faith and fair dealing.
Promissory estoppel? Where consideration is lacking, to the extent necessary to prevent an injustice, the court may hold that plaintiff's reliance on a promise will substitute for
-14-
?????
consideration. However, this is not required in this case.
Defenses?
Statute of Frauds ("SOF")
Under contract law, certain contracts must be in writing in order to be enforced. Under the UCC, a sale of goods contract valued at $500 or more must be in writing, and signed by the party against whom enforcement is sought. In this case, CapCo is seeking enforcement against the Bears. The facts indicate that the Bears' team manager signed a written contract. The SOF has been satisfied.
Parol Evidence Rule
The parol evidence rule prohibits introduction of evidence of a prior or contemporaneous agreement that varies or contradicts a fully integrated writing. A merger clause is usually a strong indication that the writing is fully integrated. To determine if a writing is fully integrated, the court may follow either the Corbin or Williston view. Here, we have a written contract with sufficient certainty for a court to enforce it. The attempted change to the contract to 50 caps occurred after contract formation and will be admissible and treated as a modification.
Mistake
When a party to a contract makes a mistake, it is a unilateral mistake, which will not prevent enforcement of the contract unless the other party knew or had reason to know of the mistake. Mistake occurs at contract formation, which may apply here, as an estimate was provided for 75-100 caps. Since we are dealing with an output/requirements contract, this "mistaken estimate" will be treated differently, as the quantity in an output/requirements contract is not explicitly stated in the contract at formation. Mistakes after formation may be addressed as a discharge of duty issue.
Modification
Under the UCC, a modification requires mutual assent; no new consideration is required, but the parties must act in good faith. Here, the elements appear to be established as the parties orally agreed. There are 3 issues with respect to the attempted change to the contract. First, there is a no-oral modification ("NOM") clause in the written contract. Secondly, because it is an output/requirements contract, a change to output/requirements may be made as long as the decrease in requirements is made in good faith, or the increase is not disproportionate to a statement estimate. Thirdly, a modification is still subject to the Statute of Frauds and must be in writing if it is a sales of goods contract of $500 under the UCC, which is what we have here.
-15-
??
NOM clause. Generally, under such a clause, it is construed as a private statute of frauds, and the modification must be in writing, as it was a term/promise of the agreement. However, some courts may construe the oral agreement as a waiver of the NOM clause itself. The enforcement of the modification will depend on the jurisdiction, but it will likely be held enforceable provided the parties acted in good faith.
Output/Requirements contract. As stated above, a decrease in requirements is acceptable if made in good faith. Here, the Bears team manager had fewer kids sign up than he expected. There are no facts to indicate that he acted in bad faith. The court will likely enforce the reduction.
State of Frauds. Defined supra. If the modification is $500 or more, the SOF applies. Here, the modification was for 50 caps at $8.50 or $425. The contract will not fall under the SOF.
Was the modification made under duress or bad faith?
Modification is defined supra. Here, CapCo had a duty to act in good faith. When the Bears reduced their amount, CapCo increased the price due to less profits. While not necessarily in bad faith, CapCo assumed this risk when he entered into an output/requirements contact. However, because of the stated estimate of 75-100, CapCo may be successful in arguing he did not believe that nearly a 50 percent reduction in caps was a reasonable risk to assume. Unless an injustice would occur, the original price will likely be enforced.
Performance/Breach/Remedies
A party's duties arise and their performance is due when all conditions are satisfied, excused or waived. Here, Bears owed a duty to pay CapCo upon receipt of the goods. However, Bears is now claiming they do not owe the increased price.
Will CapCo or Bears prevail?
A non-breaching party may recover their expectation damages, plus consequential and incidental damages, less cost avoided and loss avoided. Here, if CapCo shipped 50 hats, he will be entitled to the contract price for that installment. However, the issue is the price. Because the oral modification will likely [be] held to be valid as discussed above, and the loss in profit was assumed by CapCo because of the nature of an output/requirements contract, CapCo may recover for 50 caps at the price of $7.50 unless an injustice would result.
Lions v. CapCo
Governing law. The UCC will also govern this case as in CapCo v. Bears. The elements of a contract are defined supra.
-16-
?????
Offer? Defined supra. Here, we have a written letter fro[m] CapCo to Lions. There are sufficient terms because parties and quantity is [sic] identified. There is a valid offer.
Merchant[']s firm offer?
Under the UCC, a merchant's signed memo ("merchant's firm offer") will be construed as an option and must be held open for the time stated, not to exceed 3 months. Here, we have a letter from CapCo to Lions identifying the essential terms (quantity and parties). While not signed, it was presumably a letter from CapCo. If on letterhead, the courts will find this to satisfy the signature requirement. While a particular time is not stated, it will be held open for a reasonable time.
Acceptance?
Defined supra. Under the mailbox rule, acceptance is effective upon dispatch. Here, Lions mailed a letter immediately after reading CapCo's letter. Absent other circumstances, this is valid acceptance upon dispatch.
Revoked offer/Counteroffer?
Generally, unless an offer is irrevocable, a party may revoke at any time prior to acceptance. Here, Lions mailed his acceptance. Prior to receiving the acceptance, CapCo found its error and phoned Lions. However, the acceptance was effective upon dispatch as stated above. Unless CapCo can prove a valid mistake, the acceptance formed the contract and his attempt to revoke is invalid. In addition, because of the merchant's firm offer rule, CapCo could not revoke his offer until after a reasonable time, not to exceed 3 months. The facts indicate a short period of time had passed, so the irrevocable period was still in effect.
Defenses?
Statute of Frauds.
Defined supra. Here, we have a writing from CapCo, with the essential terms. This will satisfy the SOF.
Mistake
When a party to a contract makes a mistake, it is a unilateral mistake, which will not prevent enforcement of the contract unless the other party knew or had reason to know of the mistake. Here, CapCo made a typographical error on their letter and got the price wrong, making this a unilateral mistake. While the facts indicate that the Lions manager was "excited" when he read the letter, there is no indication that he knew or should have known about the error. $2.50 per cap does not sound so unreasonable that he should have known. The letter also stated that it was a special deal for a limited time. If the court finds
-17-

that Lions did now [sic] know, then Lions will be able to enforce the contract as he received it.
Performance/Breach/Remedies
Remedies are defined supra. Lions is owed performance by CapCo to sell/ship the caps at the stated price. Lions will prevail in this case and may sue for enforcement of the contract, or he may cover and sue for the difference between the market price and the contract price.
-18-

2)
CapCo v. Bears Contract Formation
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
????A contract is a promise or a set of promises that the law will enforce. A valid contract consists of an offer, acceptance, consideration, and legal purpose and parties. We have legal parties and purpose in the CapCo - Bear contract.
Does the UCC apply?
This is an order for the sale of goods (things that are movable at the time of identification for contract) so the UCC applies.
Are the parties merchants?
A merchant is someone who sells goods of the type involved in the transaction or holds himself out as having knowledge peculiar to the goods in question. CapCo is in the business of selling baseball caps. CapCo is a merchant.
The Bears is [sic] [in] a youth league and probably an incidental purchaser of goods related to youth baseball. The Bears organization is not a merchant.
Does the Statute of Frauds (SOF) apply?
The Statute of Frauds requires that certain agreements must be in writing to be enforceable. These would include promises in consideration of marriage, contracts that could not be performed in one year, the transfer of land, payments by an executor (out of his pocket) for the debts of an estate, guarantors, and in this case, by way of the UCC which codified the requirement, the sale of goods for $500 or more.
Was there an Offer?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the intended offeree with the understanding of the offeree that his or her assent would conclude the bargain.
Here, we have the Bears receiving a written offer from CapCo for the sale of "all baseball caps needed" for the 2006 season. Since it is written, it satisfies the SOF (supra) and is needed since the estimated contract price could be as much as $7,500 if up to 100 (upper range of estimate) baseball caps were ordered by Bears.
-19-
????
Therefore, we have an offer.
UCC Firm Offer?
In addition to the fact that this appears to be a requirements contract, CapCo is bound as a merchant under the firm offer rule[,] which stipulates that if a merchant in a signed writing to buy or sell goods gives assurances that the offer will remain open, it will remain open for the term stated, but not longer than 3 months if there is no consideration.
Was there an Acceptance?
An acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. Here, we have the Bears team manager ordering hats in reliance on the written offer from CapCo when he ordered 50 caps.
Was there Consideration?
Consideration is that which is bargained for, i.e., the baseball caps. We have consideration.
Requirements Contract
A requirements contracts is one whereby a merchant will provide whatever number of goods that the buyer requires. Here, we have a requirements contract provided by CapCo to Bears to provide all of their baseball caps "needed" for the 2006 season, which have been estimated at 75-100 caps, at $7.50 each.
Once the Bears manager ordered 50 caps, he was acting within the guidelines of a requirements contract. He was not obligated to place a minimum order, but use only "good faith" in negotiating and performing the contract. CapCo would be obligated to provide these caps at $7.50 each under the terms outlined.
Illusory Promise
An illusory contract is one in which the promisor makes a promise that is really not binding because it does not commit him to any action. CapCo may argue that since the Bears only ordered 50 caps and didn't have to order any at all, that they were making an illusory promise. However, this argument will fail in the case of requirements contracts as long as the parties use "good faith" and fair dealings.
No Oral Modification Clauses
The CapCo - Bear contained a no oral modification clause, i.e., "all modifications to this contract must be in writing." Under the UCC, this provision will be enforced.
-20-
??????
However, when the Bears manager informed CapCo that they only needed 50 caps and CapCo responded that the price would now "trigger" a higher price per cap of $8.50, these negotiations were done orally so there was no modification to the agreement because it was not in writing.
Therefore, the original requirements contract was still in force at $7.50 each.
Breach of Contract
A breach of contract occurs when one party to the contract indicates that they will not perform according to the terms of the contract, i.e., their agreed performance. A breach can be minor or major (material). Upon breach, the non-breaching party can suspend (minor) or cancel their own performance (major) and sue for damages.
In CapCo's suit against the Bears, it is most likely that CapCo will lose because Bears had an enforceable requirements contract with CapCo for only the caps that they required ("all caps needed") for the 2006 season. There was not a minimum order size that was specified in the written agreement. And, because the contract provided for no oral modifications, the later agreement by the Bears manager would not be binding.
In summary, The Bears will prevail and if necessary, they will be entitled to damages based on cover (purchase caps from another supplier) and collect damages from CapCo for the additional amounts they might have to pay the new supplier for the caps (the cover price - contract price). Or if they decide not to cover, the market price - contract price at the time of the breach.
Lions v. CapCo Contract Formation
A contract is a promise or a set of promises that the law will enforce. A valid contract consists of an offer, acceptance, consideration, and legal purpose and parties. We have legal parties and purpose in the Lions - CapCo contract.
Does the UCC apply?
This is an order for the sale of goods (things that are movable at the time of identification for contract) so the UCC applies.
Are the parties merchants?
A merchant is someone who sells goods of the type involved in the transaction or holds himself out as having knowledge peculiar to the goods in question. CapCo is in the business of selling baseball caps. CapCo is a merchant.
-21-
?????
The Lions is [sic][in] a youth league and probably an incidental purchaser of goods related to youth baseball. The Lions organization is not a merchant.
Does the Statute of Frauds (SOF) apply?
The Statute of Frauds requires that certain agreements must be in writing to be enforceable. These would include promises in consideration of marriage, contracts that could not be performed in one year, the transfer of land, payments by an executor (out of his pocket) for the debts of an estate, guarantors, and in this case, by way of the UCC which codified the requirement, the sale of goods for $500 or more.
Was there an Offer?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent communicated to the intended offeree with the understanding of the offeree that his or her assent would conclude the bargain.
When CapCo sent the Lions a letter, it contained words that indicated to a reasonable offeree that it was an offer, i.e., "I can offer..." It also contained definite terms such as quantity (100 caps), price ($2.50) and time for performance (one week).
Therefore, we have an offer.
UCC Firm Offer?
In addition to the fact that this appears to be a requirements contract, CapCo is bound as a merchant under the firm offer rule[,] which stipulates that if a merchant in a signed writing to buy or sell goods gives assurances that the offer will remain open, it will remain open for the term stated, but not longer than 3 months if there is no consideration.
The letter to the Lions said that the offer would be good "for a limited time" (determined as a reasonable time probably not to exceed one week - the time for delivery). Therefore, this is not a firm offer, but is subject to revocation by the offeror.
Was there an Acceptance?
An acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. Here, we have the Lions team manager ordering hats in reliance on the written offer from CapCo when he "immediately mailed an acceptance to CapCo.["]
Under the mailbox rule, an acceptance is effective when posted if posted in compliance with the offer. Here, because the offer was in a form of a letter, a reasonable acceptance would be by return letter ("mailed her acceptance").
????Therefore, we have an acceptance.
-22-

Was there Consideration?
Consideration is that which is bargained for, i.e., the 100 baseball caps for $2.50 per cap. We have consideration.
Revocation Attempt/Unilateral Mistake
Once CapCo learned of the mistake they had [made] when they quoted the caps at $2.50 per cap as opposed to $6.50, CapCo telephoned Lions about the mistake. However, acceptance had already occurred when Lions mailed the acceptance so this attempt at revoking the offer at $2.50 will fail.
However, if the Lions knew of [sic] should have known that $2.50 was an obvious error, then they will not be allowed to "snap up" the hats at the $2.50 price. However, there are no facts to suggest they were aware of the miscalculation.
Therefore, the revocation will fail because the Lions did not receive the revocation before accepting the offer under the mailbox rules (acceptance when mailed) and CapCo will not be allowed a defense of unilateral mistake.
Enforcement of Contract
The Lions accepted a bona fide offer from CapCo for 100 caps at $2.50 each that was in writing and accepted within a reasonable time. They will be able to enforce the agreement against CapCo.
???-23-

Question 3
Dan separated from his wife, Bess, and moved out of the house they own together. About one week later, on his way to work the night shift, Dan passed by the house and saw a light on. He stopped and rang the bell. Bess answered the door. She was polite, but told him she was getting ready to go out with her girlfriends. As Dan left, he saw a pair of men's shoes in the entryway.
Later that night, Dan told his friend, Fred, about the shoes. Fred said: "Let's go over there and check it out. We'll use my car so Bess won't recognize it." Dan and Fred drove over to the house, and parked a block away, so the car would not be seen by Bess. Fred waited in the car while Dan went around the side of the house, turned over a garbage can and climbed on top to look through the open bedroom window. Dan saw a man, Chris, on the bed with Bess. Dan jumped through the open window and started yelling at Bess, "How could you do this?"
Dan then went to the closet and grabbed his shotgun, which was locked in a plastic case. He turned to Chris, and chased him down the stairs and out of the house, yelling deadly threats. Chris tripped, fell, and hit his head on the front steps. The fall knocked him unconscious.
Bess called the police. When the police arrived, Dan was sitting outside on the front porch holding the shotgun, still in the locked case. Dan told the police that he had chased Chris out because he feared his wife had been in danger.
Fred got out of the car and came over to the scene. The police placed Dan in custody and asked Fred to meet them at the station for further questioning.
1. With what crime or crimes, if any, can Dan reasonably be charged and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably assert? Discuss.
2. With what crime or crimes, if any, can Fred reasonably be charged and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably assert? Discuss.
-24-

?3)
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
State v. Dan
?Conspiracy - an agreement between two or more people with the specific intent to commit an unlawful act or a lawful act by unlawful means.
The facts show that Dan had stopped by to see his wife, Bess, from whom he was separated[,] and while there he saw a pair of men[']s shoes. Dan told his friend Fred about it at work[,] who suggested they go over and check it out. Fred suggested they use his car so Bess wouldn't recognize it. They went to the house but parked a block away. Dan climbed on top of a trash can to look in the bedroom window of the house while Fred waited in the car. Dan would not be charged with conspiracy.
Burglary
Common Law - the breaking and entering [of] the dwelling of another at nighttime with the specific intent to commit a felony therein.
Modern Law - the entering [of] a building to commit a[n] unlawful act.
The facts show that Dan worked the night shift and came by later that night after work to Bess's house. Dan and Bess were separated and she was the only one living in the house and therefore it is the dwelling of another[,] not Dan's. Dan jumped through an open window when he saw a man in bed with Bess. This jumping through a window shows an entering into the house. However, Dan did not break into the house so under common law this would fail. The facts do not show that Dan had any intent to commit a felony when he jumped through the window. He was yelling at Bess but did not show that their [sic] was any intent to do a[n] unlawful act at that point. He did commit unlawful acts later but did not have the specific intent when he jumped through the window.
Therefore under both Common Law and Modern Law there is no burglary. Dan cannot be charged with burglary.
Assault is a specific intent crime which may be a[n]:
(1) Attempted battery
(2) Intentional placing one in reasonable apprehension or fear of immediate danger for one's life.
-25-
????
Assault of Chris:
The facts show that Dan went to the closet and grabbed his shotgun and began chasing Chris down the stairs and out of the house. Since Chris was fleeing from Dan he would be in reasonable apprehension and fear for his life. It was an immediate threat as Dan was carrying a shotgun.
Dan will argue that it was not a reasonable apprehension as there was no immediate danger since the shotgun was still in its locked plastic case and therefore Dan was unable to fire it. However, this argument will fail as Dan could have used the gun as a weapon against Chris without firing it as he could have hit him with the gun. Therefore there was an assault.
Dan will argue that he did not have the specific intent to harm Chris and therefore was not guilty of assault. He was only yelling at her [sic] and did not take any steps towards her to place her [sic] in danger. The State will argue that the yelling combined with the getting of the gun was enough to place him in reasonable apprehension or fear as he could have unlocked the gun at any time and used it on Chris.
Defense of Others - One is privileged to use reasonable force to protect others. Dan will argue that he thought Bess was in danger and that he was trying to protect her. He will argue that he used reasonable force as he did not take the gun out of its locked case. This argument will fail as the facts show that Dan had seen men[']s shoes in the house when he had been there earlier and further that he had seen her in bed with Chris. He also had yelled at Bess and asked her how she could do this. This shows that he knew she was not in danger but instead he was angry and shocked at what he had seen. There are no facts to show that Bess was in any danger.
Dan will be charged with the assault of Chris.
Assault of Bess
The facts show that Dan jumped through the window and began yelling at Bess. While mere words may not be sufficient to cause apprehension[,] when it is coupled with Dan getting a gun out of the closet[,] that is enough to make Bess apprehensive or fearful of immediate harm.
Dan will argue that he did not have the specific intent to harm Bess and therefore was not guilty of assault. He was only yelling at her and did not take any steps towards her to place her in danger. The State will argue that the yelling combined with the getting of the gun was enough to place her in reasonable apprehension or fear[,] as he could have unlocked the gun at any time and used it on Bess.
Dan will be found guilty of assault of Bess. -26-
???
Battery of Chris - An unlawful application of force on the person of another. Battery is a general intent crime.
The State will argue that Dan's chasing Chris with a gun and threatening Chris that [sic] caused him to trip, fall and hit his head on the steps since he was trying to escape the assault. The facts do not show that any physical force was used by Dan against Chris. However, since Dan's chasing of Chris was the actual cause of his fall[,] Dan will be charged with the Battery against Chris.
Defense of Others - One is privileged to use reasonable force to protect others. Dan will argue that he thought Bess was in danger and that he was trying to protect her. He will argue that he used reasonable force[,] as he did not take the gun out of its locked case. This argument will fail as the facts show that Dan had seen men[']s shoes in the house when he had been there earlier and further that he had seen her in bed with Chris. He also had yelled at Bess and asked her how she could do this. This shows that he knew she was not in danger but instead he was angry and shocked at what he had seen. There are not facts to show that Bess was in any danger so this defense fails.
Attempted Murder of Chris - An attempt is a substantial step taken towards the commission of a crime[,] which in this case would be murder.
Dan grabbed his gun and began chasing Chris[,] yelling deadly threats[.] These are substantial steps towards the commission of murder. Chris was running down the stairs and out of the house trying to escape Dan. The facts show that Chris was in fear for his life. If in fact Dan had killed Chris or Chris had died from his injuries the attempted murder would merge into the crime of murder. However, since Chris was only unconscious there are not facts to show he died.
Dan will argue that he had no specific intent to kill Chris but was just acting in the heat of the moment due to seeing his wife in bed with Chris. He will argue that he had no time to cool off and that he was provoked by seeing his wife in bed with Chris. He will further argue that he never took the gun out of its locked case and was in fact sitting waiting for the police on the porch with the gun still in the locked plastic case. This too shows that he lacked the specific intent.
The State will argue that a gun can be used as a weapon without firing it and that Dan was using it as a weapon to kill Chris[,] but there are no facts to support this contention.
However, the court will find that Dan lacked the specific intent to kill Chris as he did not use the weapon against Chris in any manner[,] so Dan will not be charged with attempted murder.
Defense of Others - One is privileged to use reasonable force to protect others. Dan will argue that he thought Bess was in danger and that he was trying to protect her. He will argue that he used reasonable force as he did not take the gun out of its locked case. This
-27-
????
argument will fail as the facts show that Dan had seen men[']s shoes in the house when he had been there earlier and further that he had seen her in bed with Chris. He also had yelled at Bess and asked her how she could do this. This shows that he knew she was not in danger but instead he was angry and shocked at what he had seen. There are no facts to show that Bess was in any danger.
State v. Fred
Conspiracy - defined and discussed supra. Fred cannot be charged with conspiracy.
Accomplice Liability - One who aids, abets or encourages another in the commission of a crime is liable for the same crimes.
The facts show that Fred suggested they got [sic] to Bess's house to find out why a man[']s shoes were at the house. He also suggested they take his car and park a block away so that Bess wo[uld]n't recognize the car or see it. This shows that Fred was encouraging Dan to go to Bess's house. Fred also waited in the car while Dan went to the house to check things out. The State will argue that Fred's acts shows the [sic] was an accomplice to the crime as he aided Dan by driving him to the scene of the crimes. He encouraged him by saying ["]Let's go check it out". Further, by waiting in the car while Dan was at the house he could be considered a getaway driver and was further providing aid to Dan.
As an accomplice[,] Fred can be charged with all of the crimes that Dan is charged with[,] which in this case is battery of Chris, assault of Chris and assault of Bess.
Fred will argue that he did not have the intent to commit any crimes and thought Dan was going to check things out. He will further argue that he did not want Dan to commit any crimes. However, this argument will fail due to the secrecy with which they approached the house. Fred may also argue that he remained in the car and was unaware of what Dan was doing and he did not know Dan was committing any crime.
Fred will not be charged with the crimes listed supra if his defense of lack of intent succeed[s].
?-28-

3)
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
?STATE v. DAN 1. With what crime or crimes can Dan be charged?
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT A CRIME
An agreement by two or more parties to commit a crime with the specific intent that the crime be committed.
Here, "Dan told his friend Fred" about the suspicious shoes in his wife Bess's house and [sic] which point Fred suggested that they "check it out." There is no clear agreement between the parties except to go to the house. Whatever they meant by "check it out" could be deemed an implied conspiracy but there is no evidence from the facts that the two men planned to commit any crime or do any harm.
Thus, although they were acting in concert, there is no agreement to commit a specific crime.
SOLICITATION TO COMMIT A CRIME
Requesting, urging, tempting another to commit a crime with the specific intent that the solicitee commit the crime.
Here, Fred said "Let's go over there and check it out" and offered to use his car so Bess wouldn't recognize them. Again, while this is suspicious and may be childish it does not rise to the level of a specific crime. Nor did Fred urge Dan to do something illegal.
Thus, while Fred instigated this childish behavior there is no specific desire to commit a crime as evidenced by the duo[']s communication.
PRINCIPAL
At common law, a principal is the person who actually carries out or commits the criminal elements of the crime at the scene of the crime. Modernly a principal is the same as common law.
Here, Dan went toward the house and Fred stayed in the car. Thus, Fred was not close to Dan while Dan acted[,] and each element of each crime below was committed by Dan.
Thus, [Dan] acted as a common law principal and modernly as a principal in the commission of the crimes listed below.
-29-

BURGLARY - COMMON LAW
The trespassory breaking and entering [of] the dwelling house of another in the nighttime with an intent to commit a felony therein.
Here, Dan entered his own house in the nighttime on his way to work. Although he "owned" the house with Bess, he no longer had habitation privileges and so any entry would be deemed trespassory without Bess's consent. There are no facts to indicate Dan's intent upon entering and so entry alone will not prove that he had a felonious intent - perhaps he originally just wanted to talk to them, even though he was yelling. Further Dan entered an "open" window and so the breaking element is not satisfied.
Thus, Dan did not commit common law burglary.
BURGLARY - MODERNLY
Breaking into any structure to commit any crime, even a misdemeanor.
Here, Dan entered without Bess's consent and started "yelling" immediately. If he planned to commit a battery[,] which may be inferred by his immediate "yelling" and rush to get his shotgun, he would have committed a modern burglary.
Thus, Dan may be charged with a modern burglary. ASSAULT - ATTEMPTED BATTERY
A substantial step toward the completion of a battery with the specific intent that a battery be committed.
Here, Dan "chased" Chris down the stairs and caused Chris to fall. He was chasing him with a shotgun[,] which he could use as a weapon independent of shooting it[,] and his chasing, coupled with his "yelling deadly threats"[,] supports a substantial step toward a battery[,] given that they were in close quarters.
Thus, Dan will be charged with assault type of attempted battery. ASSAULT - CREATION OF FEAR
Defendant intentionally created a reasonable apprehension of receipt of an imminent battery in the person of the victim.
Here, as outlined immediately above, Chris was "chased" and obviously in fear as he "fell"[,] and likely did so out of rushing to vacate the house. Chris was aware of and saw Dan so he would have been aware of the gun.
-30-

Thus, if Chris had a reasonable fear of being harmed, Dan will be charged with this type of assault.
ASSAULT - AGGRAVATED ASSAULT
Assault with a deadly weapon and/or felonious intent.
Here, even though the shotgun was "still in the locked case" Dan had the apparent ability to use the gun in a deadly manner.
Thus, Dan will be charged with aggravated assault. BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to the person of the victim resulting in harm or offensive contract without consent or privilege.
Here, although Dan did not actually touch Chris[,] from the facts, Dan put the forces in motion[,] causing the harmful contact wherein Chris was knocked unconscious from the fall after being "chased" by Dan. Force may be an application of force to something so closely related to the victim as to be a part of[sic]. Since Dan was "chasing" Chris and yelling at him, Chris's escape was probably not careful and[,] again, Dan put the risky forces into motion that caused Chris's fall.
Thus, because Dan put the forces into motion causing Chris to fall, he may be charged with battery.
MERGE -
An assault of attempted battery will merge into the completed crime of batter[y].
Here, the battery type assault will merge but the creation of fear assault will remain a separate charge.
ATTEMPTED MURDER
A substantial step toward the completion of a murder with the intent to kill. MURDER is homicide with malice aforethought.
Here, Dan must have evidenced an intent and desire to kill coupled with his actions. A crime that requires malice like murder requires a specific intent in the attempt. Because Dan did not take the gun out of the locked case he did not take a "substantial step" toward the murder, unless he planned to knock Chris around with the gun in the locked case. But, since he did no further harm to Chris from the facts[.] [sic] After Chris fell, it is not possible
-31-

to infer that Dan wanted Chris dead.
Thus, a charge for attempted murder will likely fail. DEFENSES
ADEQUATE PROVOCATION
Defendant was provoked to kill; a reasonable person would have been provoked to kill; the defendant did not cool down from the time of provocation to the time of the killing; and a reasonable person would not have cooled down from the time of provocation to the time of the killing.
Here, at common law catching one's spouse in the act of suffering from a staggering blow may have supported a mitigation of a crime due to adequate provocation. Here, however, Dan saw Chris "on the bed" with Bess[,] not having sex with her[,] from the facts. Further, no reasonable person would remain provoked from the original provocation of seeing shoes in the entryway long enough to return and burglarize the house. This issue depends on whether the court looks at the provocation as commencing with the spotting of the shoe in the entryway long enough to return and burglarize the house. This issue depends on whether the court looks at the provocation as commencing with the spotting of the shoe in the entryway - in which case any reasonable person would have calmed down - or at the time he looked into the window and still[,] since the couple did not appear to be making love, Dan's acts will not be mitigated because of this theory. Further he did not complete the crime of murder.
Thus, Dan's offenses will not be mitigated.
IMPERFECT SELF[-]DEFENSE
An honest but unreasonable and mistaken belief in the necessity of deadly force.
Here, Dan claims "he feared his wife had been in danger"[,] which seems unreasonable because Chris ran away and there are no facts to support this. Dan came to the house in a childish manner[,] without a legitimate reason given that he "climbed on top" of a garbage can to spy on his wife Bess. However, even an imperfect self[-]defense may be supported by an unreasonable mistake.
Thus, unless the court finds any reason for Dan to fear for Bess, this theory will fail to mitigate Dan's behavior.
DEFENSE OF OTHERS
At common law a close relationship was required[;] modernly anyone may defend anyone with whatever reasonable force is necessary to repel the attack[,] and one may defend
-32-
?
another with whatever amount of force it reasonably appears that the victim would have been privileged to use.
Here, Dan was "close" to Bess as a separated husband, but Chris was "on the bed with Bess"[,] nothing more[,] from the facts. There is nothing to say that Bess was privileged to use any force against Chris[,] which would support Dan's claim.
Thus, this theory will likely fail.
STATE v. FRED 1. With what crime or crimes can Fred be charged?
CONSPIRACY Defined supra.
Here, as outline[d] above, the duo did not specify any specific crime; they just went to "check it out"[,] and we don't know what that means.
Thus, Fred will not be charged with conspiracy. SOLICITATION
Defined supra.
Here, Fred may have impliedly solicited Dan to act by encouraging him to do something that Fred knew would aggravate Dan. However, because there is no crime mentioned, this may fail.
Thus, Fred may be charged with solicitation[,] but unless the court infers an implied solicitation[,] this may fail.
PRINCIPAL IN THE SECOND DEGREE
At common law someone at the scene aiding, encouraging, abetting another in the commission of a crime. All liability for completed crimes committed by the principal in the first degree attaches to the principal in the second degree.
Here, Fred aided and abetted Dan by driving and purposefully hiding the car to encourage Dan's bad behavior.
Thus, any liability for completed crimes by Dan will attach to Fred.
-33-

ACCESSORY BEFORE THE FACT
At common law [a] person who aids and encourages before the commission of a crime. All liability for completed crimes committed by the principal in the first degree attaches to the accessory.
Here, as outlined above, Fred impliedly encouraged Dan to go to Bess's [house] but nothing more. However, the resulting activity was encouraged by and instigated by Fred.
Thus, Dan's liability will attach to Fred because of Fred's encouragement.
ACCOMPLICE
Modernly an accomplice is the equivalent of a common law accessory. One who aids and encourages and assists another in committing a crime. All liability for completed crimes committed by the principal in the first degree attaches to the accomplice.
Here, as noted above, Fred helped Dan commit the crimes.
Thus, liability will attach to Fred for Dan's crimes.
MISPRIS[I]ON[,] A FELONY
Failure to disclose the commission of a felony or to stop a felony.
Here, Fred should have called the police if and when Dan was away too long. If he heard yelling, etc., he should have done something to stop the potential altercation.
Thus, Fed will be charged with mispris[i]on[,] a felony.
DEFENSES
MISTAKE OF FACT - UNREASONABLE
may be a defense to criminal culpability - even unreasonable mistake of fact if Fred truly did not know of Dan's criminal intent.
Here, Fred may have thought the couple would get back together or talk or something. So even if his mistake is absurd, given his encouragement and childish behavior[,] it could negate the mens rea of specific intent to aid and abet, and the other crimes[,] and relieve Fred of liability as an accomplice or otherwise.
AGENCY
Vicarious liability theory where a principal uses an agent to commit a crime. The principal authorizes the agent to act[,] who acts at the principal's direction and control.
-34-
?
Here, a court may infer that Fred used Dan as an innocent agent to harm Bess. By saying "Let's check it out" and by offering to drive, Fred may have been putting Dan in a position purposefully to harm Bess[,] unbeknownst to Dan[,] and[,] if so[,] the liability for Dan's completed crimes would attach to Fred under this theory. Dan would have been acting as Fred's instrumentality in this situation. However, there is no dialogue between the two evidencing an intent or agreement (as outlined above) to commit a specific crime.
Thus, Fred may be charged under this theory with sufficient facts.
-35-

Question 4
Grain Co. purchases grain from farmers each fall to resell as seed grain to other farmers for spring planting. Because of problems presented by parasites which attack and eat seed grain that is stored for more than a few months, Grain Co., like all seed grain dealers, always treats the seed grain it purchases with an invisible mercury-based chemical to poison these parasites. Grain Co. sells the seed grain loose by the truckload to the farmers who will plant the seed. The Grain Co. trucks display signs that state: "Seed Grain. Not for Use in Food Products."
Farmer Jones bought a truckload of seed grain from Grain Co. She was present when the seed grain was delivered, and supervised the Grain Co. employees who unloaded the seed grain into her silos. She then used some of the seed grain to sow her field. When she found that she had some seed grain left over, she fed it to her dairy cattle.
Farmer Jones sold the milk produced by her dairy cattle to Big Food Stores, Inc. ("Big Food"). Several of the people who bought their milk at Big Food became seriously ill, and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), a government agency that investigates outbreaks of illness, determined that mercury poisoning was the cause of their illness. CDC traced the mercury to the milk that Farmer Jones sold to Big Food.
On what theory or theories might the injured milk consumers recover damages from, and what defenses should they anticipate, in actions against:
1. Grain Co.? Discuss.
2. Farmer Jones? Discuss. 3. Big Food? Discuss.
-36-

4)
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
?1. MILK CONSUMERS (MC) v. GRAINCO PRODUCTS LIABILITY
NEGLIGENCE
Duty
A commercial supplier has a duty to act as a reasonable person like them would.
Breach
Since GrainCo used an invisible mercury[-]based chemical to poison parasites, it would prevent people such as farmers to [sic] visually recognize that the grain is poisonous. If GrainCo would use some type of dye or other method to easily identify grain that has been treated with mercury poison, it would help prevent the misuse of poisonous grain in food products. Further, GrainCo used an invisible mercury[-]based chemical to poison parasites[;] it would prevent people such as farmers to [sic] visually recognize that the grain is poisonous. Even though the GrainCo trucks display signs that state: "Seed Grain. Not for Use in Food Products", it is unclear from the facts how big these signs are or if Farmer Jones saw the signs while she supervised the delivery. However, given the passage of time, Farmer Jones could have forgotten not to use the Seed Grain in food products. Finally, even though GrainCo warned to not use the Seed Grain in food products, it did not warn that invisible mercury poison was used to treat the seed grain.
Therefore, GrainCo breached its duty.
Actual cause
"But for" GrainCo treating its grain seed with invisible mercury[-]based chemicals, CM [sic] would not have become sick after drinking milk that came from Farmer Jones['] cows, who ate the grain seed.
Therefore, GrainCo is the actual cause of MC's damages.
Proximate cause
MC's damages are a direct result of GrainCo using poison to treat their grain. It is foreseeable that farmers may use the grain for food products which may result in injuries, as those suffered by MC.
-37-
???????
Therefore, GrainCo is the proximate cause.
DAMAGES
MC can recover general damages from their pain and suffering caused by their serious illness. Further[,] they may recover special damages for out[-]of[-]pocket expenses[,] such as medical bill[s][,] to treat their serious illness.
DEFENSES
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
A plaintiff's recovery is reduced by the amount of harm attributable to her own negligence. In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, any negligence on the party [sic] of the plaintiff is a complete bar to recovery.
There are no fact[s] to indicate the MC were negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Acts as a complete bar to recovery if it is found that plaintiff was aware of the risk they were taking and acted unreasonably to place themselves at risk.
The facts do not indicate that MC were aware of any risk they were taking. Therefore, this defense will fail.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory.
STRICT LIABILITY
DUTY
A commercial supplier has an absolute duty to not introduce into the stream of commerce a defective product.
Foreseeable plaintiff
Under McPhersen v. Buick, a plaintiff does not have to be in privity to recover for damages.
-38-
???????
Breach
Design Defect
Since, GrainCo used an invisible mercury[-]based chemical to poison parasites, it would prevent people such as farmers to[sic] visually recognize that the grain is poisonous. If GrainCo would use some type of dye or other method to easily identify grain that has been treated with mercury poison, it would help prevent the misuse of poisonous grain in food products.
Therefore, there is a design error.
Warning Defect
Since, GrainCo used an invisible mercury[-]based chemical to poison parasites, it would prevent people such as farmers to [sic] visually recognize that the grain is poisonous. Even though the GrainCo trucks display signs that state: "Seed Grain. Not for Use in Food Products", it is unclear from the facts how big these signs are or if Farmer Jones saw the signs while she supervised the delivery. However, given the passage of time, Farmer Jones could have forgotten not to use the Seed Grain in food products. Finally, even though GrainCo warned to not use the Seed Grain in food products, it did not warn that invisible mercury poison was used to treat the seed grain.
Therefore there is a warning defect. Manufacturing Defect
There are no facts to indicate that the seed grain was not manufactured as intended. The facts indicate that all seed grain dealers treat their seed in this fashion.
Therefore there is no manufacturing defect.
Actual cause
"But for" GrainCo treating its grain seed with invisible mercury[-]based chemicals, CM would not have become sick after drinking milk that came from Farmer Jones['] cows, who ate the grain seed.
Therefore, GrainCo is the actual cause of MC's damages.
Proximate cause
MC's damages are a direct result of GrainCo using poison to treat their grain. It is foreseeable that farmers may use the grain for food products[,] which may result in injuries, as those suffered by MC.
-39-
??????
2. MILK CONSUMERS (MC) v. FARMER JONES PRODUCTS LIABILITY
NEGLIGENCE
Duty
Defined Supra[.]
Breach
Since Farmer Jones fed the Grain Seed to her dairy cows and sold the milk they produced, causing several people who bought her milk to become seriously ill because of the mercury poison, she breached the duty she owed consumers.
Therefore, there was a breach. Actual cause
"But for" Farmer Jones feeding her cows the poisonous grain seed, MC would not have become seriously ill.
Proximate cause
MC injuries are a direct cause of Farmer Jones feeding her cows the poisonous grain seed. It is foreseeable that MC could become ill by drinking this milk.
Damages
Defined and discussed supra.
DEFENSES TO NEGLIGENCE
Discussed and defined supra.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory. STRICT LIABILITY IN TORT
Duty
Defined Supra[.]
-40-
???????????
Foreseeable plaintiff
Defined in Supra[.]
Breach
Manufacturing Defect
Since Farmer Jones fed her cows the poisonous grain seed, which caused them to produce milk that made several people seriously ill, her milk was not as intended to be produced.
Therefore, there is a manufacturing defect. Warning Defect
Since Farmer Jones failed to warn Big Food or MC that her milk her cows were feds[sic] the poisonous grain seed containing poison[sic], a warning defect exists.
Therefore there is a warning defect. Actual cause
Defined and discussed supra[.] Proximate cause
Defined and discussed supra[.] Damages
Defined and discussed supra[.] DEFENSES
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK Defined and discussed supra. WARRANTY
Defined Supra[.]
Since Farmer Jones introduced a defective product into the stream of commerce, the bad milk, and MC purchased and consumed it, the milk was not safe for normal consumption of [sic] was not of average quality.
-41-
??????????
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory. 3. MILK CONSUMERS v. BIG FOOD PRODUCTS LIABILITY
NEGLIGENCE
Since Big Foods is unable to identify by reasonable inspection that the milk was poisonous, it will not be liable under this theory of law.
STRICT LIABILITY
Defined and discussed above.
Since Big Foods has an absolute duty to not introduce a defective product into the stream of commerce, it is strictly liable for the injuries suffered by MC. Further[,] it may seek indemnification from the [sic] Farmer Jones and GrainCo.
DEFENSES FOR STRICT LIABILITY Defined and discussed supra.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory. WARRANTY
Defined[.]
Since Big Food sold the defective milk to MC, it breached its duty that the milk was safe for normal use and of average quality.
Therefore, MC can recover under this theory.
??????-42-

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
?4)
Injured milk consumers (plaintiffs) v. Grain Co.
I. Can plaintiffs sue Grain Co. for damages based on theories of strict liability in tort, negligence, and implied warranty for damages from consuming bad milk?
A. To sue for strict liability in tort, the plaintiff must show that there is a proper defendant, a defect in the product that was the actual and proximate cause of the cognizable injury to plaintiff. There must be no viable defenses.
1. Is Grain Co. a proper defendant? A proper defendant is someone involved in the market chain of the milk. This would start with the mild [sic] producers[,] which include the manufacturer, marketers, wholesalers, distributors, and retailers. Here, Grain Co. was a manufacturer of grain, not milk. These grains were meant to be sown and not fed to dairy cattle. However, there may be a foreseeable misuse of the grain as feed for the cattle, and in fact that is what Farmer Jones did. This led to the bad mild [sic] that caused plaintiffs to suffer injuries. Therefore, Grain Co. is a proper defendant.
2. Are there proper plaintiffs? A proper plaintiff is the consumer and user of the product. Foreseeable bystanders who are injured by the product may also make a claim. Here, plaintiffs are consumers of the bad milk and so will have a claim.
3. Was there a defect in the grain? A defect can by [sic] in the design, manufacturing[,] or failure to warn.
a. Plaintiffs may argue that there is a defect in the design by applying the parasite poison to grain that may be used as feed. To do this, plaintiff must show that the risk of injuries to plaintiffs outweighs the benefit of using the poison. It is a question of fact whether there is a high probability that farmers will use the grain as feed for their dairy cattle. Farmers tend to avoid waste of anything on their farm, so there is a high probability that the grain will be used as feed. The benefit of using this poison instead of something that will be safer for people down the line must be proven. Since other grain companies also use this poison and it is state[-]of[-]the[-]art, plaintiff will not be able to win the claim of a design defect.
b. Plaintiffs may argue that there is a defect in the warning on the side of the truck. To do this, plaintiff must argue that the warning was inadequate. There must be something more noticeable[,] such as a form for the farmers to sign[,] showing that they know not to use the grain as feed for their dairy cattle. This would be better than simply a sign on the truck saying not to use for feed but did not explain the possible repercussion[s]. The fact finders will find that there is a failure to warn.
-43-
???
4. Was the defect the actual and proximate cause of the injures to plaintiffs? The facts show that the CDC investigation proved that the use of the poison was the cause of the injures.
5. Did plaintiff suffers [sic] damages? Here, the facts show that plaintiffs became seriously ill[,] so there are probably damages in medical bills and emotional distress. Also, there may be pecuniary loss from inability to go to work.
6. Can Grain Co. raise the defense of assumption of the risk? The Assumption of the Risk defense is proven by showing that plaintiffs 1) was [sic] actually aware of the risk and 2) voluntarily chose to encounter it. Here, plaintiffs had no knowledge that there was poison in the milk. The defense will fail.
In summary, Grain Co. is strictly liable for the injuries to plaintiffs.
B. To sue for negligence, the plaintiff must show that 1) the defendant owes a duty to act under a certain standard of care, 2) that defendant breached that duty, 3) the breach was the actual and proximate cause of the 4) cognizable injures to plaintiff.
1. What duty[,] if any[,] does Grain Co. owe to plaintiffs? There is a general duty for defendant to act like a reasonable and prudent man under similar circumstances. Here, Grain Co. must act like a reasonable and prudent grain producer.
2. Did Grain Co. breach its duty? To ascertain, plaintiff may apply the Hand formula, B < PL. B is the burden of having to act reasonably. P is the probability of an injury occurring. L is the severity of the injuries that occurred. If the burden to act reasonably is less than the product of the probability of injury and the severity of the injury, there has been a breach. Sometimes, courts will add the utility element on the left side of the equation making it UB < PL. Here, the burden of using a different[,] safer poison or not using one at all[,] may be great as far as cost. However, the burden of getting a better warning system may be quite reasonable as compared to the high probability that farmer[s] may use the grain as feed for their dairy cattle and causing severe injuries to those who consume the milk. Therefore, Grain Co. has breached by not using a better warning.
3. Causation is as above.
4. Damages is as above.
5. Can Grain Co. raise the defense of contributory negligence or comparative fault? The defense of contributory negligence will bar the plaintiff from recovery if the plaintiff's conduct was also breached[;] that of a reasonable prudent man and the breaching conduct was the proximate cause of the injury. Here, the plaintiff did not act unreasonably in any way. All they did were buying[sic] milk at the grocery store. Contributory negligence will not apply. Comparative fault will reduce the plaintiff's recovery in proportion to the degree of negligence of plaintiff's conduct. Again, it also does not apply.
-44-
???
C. To sue for implied warranty, there must be a proper defendant who is a merchant and a proper plaintiff who is the consumer or someone in her household or a foreseeable guest who may consume the product.
1. The defendant in this action must be a merchant. A merchant is someone who deals in the goods of the kind or holds himself out as having special knowledge or skills dealing with the goods in question. Here, the product from Grain Co. is grain and not milk. Grain Co. is not the proper defendant.
2. Since the plaintiffs did not consume grain and is not in the household of Farmer Jones, the plaintiffs may not sue based on implied warranty.
The injured milk consumers will win their claims against Grain Co. for strict liability in tort and negligence, but not under implied warranty.
Injured milk consumers (plaintiffs) v. Farmer Jones
I. Can plaintiffs sue Farmer Jones for damages based on theories of strict liability in tort, negligence, and implied warranty for damages from consuming bad milk?
A. Strict liability in tort
1. Farmer Jones is the proper defendant in this action because Farmer Jones manufacture[d] the milk which is defective.
2. Milk consumers are the proper plaintiffs since they purchased the milk.
3. The defect in the milk existed at the time they left Farmer Jones' farm. It is a defect in manufacturing the milk, as Farmer Jones chose to use grain with the poison substance to feed the dairy cattle. The defect in the milk is beyond the consumer expectations. When people buy milk, they assume that they are reasonably safe for consumption and that they will not get sick after drinking it. Here, the milk was defective when they left the farmer's cattle.
4. Causation is as above. 5. Damages is as above.
6. The only available defense against strict products liability is assumption of the risk[,] and it does not apply as discussed above.
In conclusion, Farmer Jones is liable to the injured milk consumers for their damages under the theory of strict liability in tort because of an unreasonably dangerous and defective milk product.
-45-
???
B. Negligence
1. Farmer Jones has a duty to act like a reasonable and prudent dairy farmer.
2. Did Farmer Jones breach his [sic] duty by feeding the grain that was meant for sowing only to his [sic] dairy cattle? Here, the Hand formula may be applied again. The burden of having to check the grain or make certain that it was not meant for dairy cattle is less than the high probability of producing poisonous milk that will cause severe illness in people who consume the milk. All he [sic] had to do is [sic] to be more aware of what he [sic] does. A reasonable farmer should know about the grains that he use[s]. He [sic] has breached.
3. Causation is as above. 4. Damages as above.
5. The defenses of contributory negligence and comparative fault will not apply as above. Assumption of the risk also does not apply.
C. Implied Warranty
1. Farmer Jones is a merchant of milk because he [sic] deals in selling milk to the groceries [sic]; therefore, he [sic] is an appropriate defendant.
2. The injured milk consumers are the natural and foreseeable buyers and consumers of the milk from the grocers. As this was foreseeable, we have proper plaintiffs as well.
3. The milk is not merchantable since it is not fit for the purpose for which it was made when used in a reasonable manner. Here, the milk was not fit for consumption because it made the consumers seriously ill. The milk was not merchantable.
4. Causation is as above.
5. Damages are as above.
6. Merchants can provide disclaimers or limitations on implied warranties if it was communicated to the consumers clearly and in words such as "milk as [sic] sold as is". However, the facts show no such disclaimers or limitations.
In conclusion, the injured milk consumers will win their claims against Farmer Jones for strict liability in tort, negligence, and implied warranty.
Injured milk consumers (plaintiffs) v. Big Food
-46-

I. Can plaintiffs sue Big Food for damages based on theories of strict liability in tort, negligence, and implied warranty for damages from consuming bad milk?
A. Strict liability in tort
1. Big Food is a proper defendant because it is a retailer who sells the milk. Big Food is in the market chain of getting of milk to the public.
2. The injured milk consumers are proper plaintiffs as discussed above. 3. Defect is as discussed above.
4. Causation is as above.
5. Damages are as above.
Similar to Farmer Jones, Big Food is liable to plaintiffs under the theory of strict liability in tort.
B. Negligence
1. Big Food has a duty to act like a reasonable and prudent store.
2. Did Big Food breach its duty by not inspecting the milk for the defect? Here, the dangerous [sic] of the poison in the milk was not easily discoverable by inspection. The poison is invisible and would not have caused any obvious discoloration of the milk. It would also be unreasonable for the grocer to taste every product on its shelves to ensure safety. The burden of having to throughly inspection [sic] the goods before sale would outweighs [sic] the risk of injury to consumers. Therefore, Big Food did not breach its duty.
3. Causation is as above. 4. Damages are as above.
Big Food did not breach its duty as it would be unreasonable to set up an inspection of all its goods prior to sale.
C. Implied warranty
1. Big Food is a merchant who deals in the sale of produce such as milk so it is a proper defendant.
2. The injured milk consumers were customers of Big Food or people in their household who would reasonably consume the milk. Therefore, we have appropriate plaintiffs.
-47-

3. The milk is not merchantable since it is not fit for the purpose for which it was made when used in a reasonable manner. Here, the milk was not fit for consumption because it made the consumers seriously ill. The milk was not merchantable.
4. Causation is as above.
5. Damages are as above.
6. Merchants can provide disclaimers or limitations on implied warranties if it was communicated to the consumers clearly and in words such as "milk as [sic] sold as is". However, the facts show no such disclaimers or limitations.
The injured milk consumers will win their claim against Big Food under the theory of strict liability in tort and implied warranty but not under negligence.
-48-


??California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2006

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2006 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2006 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Contracts 1 Criminal Law 15 Torts 24 Contracts 33
???i

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?ii

Question 1
Computer, Inc. ("CI") is a well-known manufacturer of computer equipment. On January 3 CI received an order by fax for a CI computer with advanced internet capabilities from a newly formed company, Startup, Inc. ("Startup"). The order did not contain sufficient details for CI to determine exactly which model computer Startup wanted.
On June 5, CI's order department sent a letter to Startup stating:
Received your order. However, we have over 16 different computer models; please review the enclosed catalog and fax us with the exact model number of the computer you want to purchase. We require payment in full, including shipping charges, before we will ship.
On June 8, CI received an order by mail from Startup stating, "Send us your model 100 with a Delta Operating System. Enclosed is our check for $4,500." CI immediately shipped to Startup a model 100 computer, which, as stated in CI's catalog, came equipped with a Gamma Operating System, and cost $7,000. Startup actually intended to order a CI model 10 computer, but it had made a typographical error on its June 8 order.
Upon discovering the error, CI billed Startup for an additional $2,500, the difference between the $4,500 Startup payment and the $7,000 cost of the model 100. Startup refused to pay.
Startup has been unable to use the model 100, and CI refuses to take it back.
In a suit for breach of contract by CI against Startup to recover the $2,500 differential, what defense might Startup reasonably assert, and who should prevail in the suit? Discuss.
1

1)
Answer A to Question 1
This contract is for the sale of goods. As a result, the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) will govern it.
CI v. Startup
CI will only have a case against Startup if there was a valid contract. A contract is an agreement between parties of which the law recognizes a remedy for a breach. For a contract to be formed, CI must show that there was a valid offer, a valid acceptance, and consideration.
Offer?
An offer is a manifestation of intent to enter into a contract that contains definite terms and creates the power of acceptance in the other party. On January 3, Startup sent a request to CI for a computer. However, the order did not contain sufficient details for CI to determine which computer Startup wanted. Therefore, this communication was not an offer since it did not have definite terms. On June 5, CI sent a letter to Startup explaining this to them. CI told Startup to choose from the catalog what model Startup wanted. This was not an offer either. This was simply sending a catalog, which is more of a request for an offer if it is anything. Once Startup sent the order by mail on June 8 to CI, that communication was an offer. If [sic] contained definite terms explaining what computer Startup wanted, and it clearly manifested an intention to be bound; it included payment for the computer. Thus, on June 8 an offer was made.
Acceptance?
An acceptance occurs when the offeree accepts the terms and manifests an intention to be bound to the contract. This is a bilateral contract, so an acceptance is required to be promise to perform. However, the UCC allows acceptance of the contract to occur by sending conforming goods. Once CI had received the offer, CI shipped the requested [sic] to Startup. When CI sent the computer, it did not immediately bill for the additional $2,500. As a result, CI accepted the offer for the stated computer at the named price of $4,500.
2

Consideration?
Consideration is a bargained [-] for exchange by the parties. Each party must incur a new legal detriment as a result of the agreement. Here, CI sent Startup a computer and Startup paid CI $4,500. This is sufficient consideration by both parties.
Statute of Frauds (SoF)?
The SoF requires that certain types of contracts be evidenced by a writing including the subject matter, the parties, material terms, and a signature by the party to be charged: contracts for the sale of land, contracts in consideration of marriage, suretyships, contracts which by their terms cannot be completed within one year, and contracts for the sale of goods with a value of $500 or greater. The contract in question falls in the last category. Thus, the SoF applies. The agreement between CI and Startup has a sufficient writing. When Startup placed the order to CI, a check was included which named the parties, the price term, and was signed by Startup. In addition, the actual request named the subject matter, and the other material term: the computer model. There is no signature by CI, however, in this case, CI is not the party to be charged. CI is suing Startup, so only Startup has to have signed a writing. Since there is a sufficient writing between the check and the request, the SoF is satisfied.
All of the requirement[s] for the formation of a valid contract are present. Thus, CI has a potential claim against Startup. However, Startup has a defense that it can assert.
Mistake?
Mistake is a valid defense to the formation of a contract. There are two types of mistakes: bilateral mistake, where both parties were mistaken; and unilateral mistakes, where only one party was mistaken. This mistake is a unilateral mistake: only Startup was mistaken. When Startup sent the request for the computer to CI, it was a request for a model 100 computer, and Startup paid $4,500. The price of the model 100 was actually $7,000, which CI knew as shown by the fact that CI later is trying to sue for the difference. Startup, however, was attempting to order a model 10 computer but made a typographical error. This was the Startup's mistake: the typographical error. This is a unilateral mistake. The result of a unilateral mistake is normally that the mistaken party
3

cannot avoid the contract unless the other party knew or should have known of the mistake. CI should have known of the mistake. Clearly the payment amount did not match the computer that Startup ordered. CI could have easily discovered that Startup intended to buy a model 10 by looking in their catalog and finding a computer that cost $4,500. In any event, the discrepancy in payment versus price operated to give constructive notice to CI. In addition, the model 100 game [sic] with a Gamma operating system, not the Delta operating system that Startup requested. This also should have tipped off CI as to the mistake in the order made by Startup. As a result, they should have known of Startup's mistake and Startup can avoid the contract.
After discovering that the model 100 does not work for their purposes, Startup has tried to return the computer to CI. This is an attempt to avoid the contract, a power they have due to mistake in the request. Since CI should have known of the mistake, they do not have the right to refuse the avoidance. Therefore, there is no contract.
The defense of mistake will mean that there is no contract, so CI will not prevail in their suit. Startup will prevail.
However, assuming that the defense of mistake will not work because CI should not [sic] have known of Startup's mistake, the performance of the parties must be examined.
Performance
Perfect Tender Rule
If there was a contract, then each party must substantially perform the contract.
However, in the case of a contract for the sale of goods, the UCC requires that the seller provide "Perfect Tender." This means that the seller must give the buyer exactly what was requested, or the buyer can reject the nonconforming goods and sue for breach. Startup performed the contract by paying $4,500 for the requested computer. They requested a return performance of a model 100 computer with a Delta Operating System. CI performed the contract by sending Startup a model 100 computer with the Gamma operating system. This is different from the requested operating system. Therefore, the computer is considered to be a non-conforming good. This is not perfect tender, so Startup can reject the performance.
4

Since Startup can reject the performance due to the "Perfect Tender Rule," Startup is not in breach for not paying an additional $2,500. Since they are not in breach, CI will not prevail in this suit.
5

1)
Answer B to Question 1
COMPUTER INC. ("CI") v. STARTUP
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE (UCC) vs. COMMON LAW
UCC governs contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are items which are moveable, tangible, and identifiable at the time of formation[.]
This is a contract for the sale of a computer.
A computer is an item which is tangible, moveable, and identifiable at the time of formation. Thus it is a good.
This is a contract for goods; the UCC governs.
MERCHANTS
Those who deal in the product in question or hold themselves out by means of their occupation as having knowledge or expertise peculiar to the goods in question.
CI is a manufacturer of computer equipment. Thus it is one who deals in the goods in question, and will be a merchant.
Startup is a newly formed company, and the exact nature of its business is not clear from the facts. However, it is a business which makes use of computer equipment requiring a special computer with advanced internet capabilities. This may suggest that Startup is in the computer business, or at least is specializing in such a way as to be holding itself by occupation as having skill or expertise in computers. More facts are needed to determine Startup's status.
6
???
Thus at least CI (and possibly Startup) is a merchant within the UCC. Merchants are held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing.
OFFER/PRELIMINARY NEGOTIATIONS
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent which is definite in terms and which is communicated in such a way as to create in the offeree a reasonable expectation that the offeror is willing to enter into a contract.
Startup faxed an order to CI on January 3 for a computer. This is a communication of contractual intent.
The terms of definiteness[sic] are as follows:
Quantity - 1
Time for performance - not stated; the UCC will fill in a "reasonable time"
Identity of Parties - CI and Startup
Price - not stated
Subject Matter - CI computer with advanced internet capabilities.
However, the subject matter was ambiguous because CI manufactured 16 different computers.
Under the common law, this would be fatal to an offer, because all terms were required in order to have a valid offer.
Under the UCC, the trend is toward leniency, and a court will fill in missing terms as long as it has reasonable grounds for doing so. However, here the court does not have reasonable grounds upon which to decide which of the several computers
7
?
manufactured by CI would be the computer which Startup is requesting. Thus, even under the UCC, the court will not fill in the terms, and the offer will thus be invalid.
Thus the terms are not sufficiently clear to find an offer. It will [,] however, be an invitation to deal, and be part of the course of dealing.
PRELIMINARY NEGOTIATIONS 2
CI mailed a letter to Startup on June 5, stating that they received the order but could not fulfill it with the ambiguous terms. However, this is not a clear rejection (it could not be a rejection of the offer, because the offer was invalid). It is more likely to be construed as continuing negotiations[.]
OFFER #2
On June 8, Startup mailed an order to CI. This was a present communication of contractual intent.
The terms are as follows.
Quantity - 1
Time for performance - not stated; the UCC will fill in a "reasonable time"
Identify of Parties - CI and Startup
Price - $4,500
Subject Matter - CI computer model 100 with Delta operating system
A reasonable person in the position of the offeree would understand this to be an offer.
8
??
ACCEPTANCE
An outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
CI immediately shipped the computer as ordered. The computer shipped was a model 100, but it ran on a Gamma operating system and cost $7,000.
Under the UCC, an offer can be accepted in any manner reasonable under the circumstances, either by acceptance or prompt and current shipment. CI made a prompt shipment. Thus, this is a valid acceptance under the UCC rules.
However, the item shipped did not conform in all respects to the order. But under the UCC, shipment of a non-conforming goods is still a valid acceptance but it is also at the same time a breach.
CONSIDERATION
That which is bargained for and given in exchange for performance or a return promise, requiring mutual benefit and detriment to both parties.
Here, CI shipped a computer, thus incurring a detriment but receiving the benefit of payment by Startup.
Startup paid a monetary price, incurring a detriment, but receiving the benefit of the computer.
Each performance was the inducement for the other. There is a valid consideration[.]
9
??
DEFENSES
Statute of Frauds
UCC requires contracts for the sale of goods of $500 or more (or $5,000 under the 2003 UCC revision) to be in writing to be enforce[e]able.
Here this is a sale for $4,500 and thus would be within the original UCC statute of frauds.
Sufficient Memorandum
A sufficient memorandum is a writing evidencing the formation of a contract, containing a quantity term, which is signed by the party to [be] held to the contract.
Here, the offer was made by mail by Startup. This is a writing evidencing a contract. UCC requires it to be signed. But because it came with a check which must have been signed, and the order referred to the check, the documents together will be considered an integration and the contract will be enforceable.
Performance
Because there has been performance by part payment, this is sufficient to remove the contract from the Statute of Frauds to the extent of the payment.
The Statute of Frauds will not be an effective defense.
Unilateral Mistake
Where one party is mistaken as to a basic material fact upon which contract is based, and the other party knew or should have known this fact, the contract resulting is voidable by the mistaken, adversely affected, party.
10
?
Startup was mistaken in its offer, accidentally requesting the model 100 instead of the model 10 as they intended. The type of computer which was ordered is a basic fact of the contract.
Startup will argue that CI should have known of the mistake, because while requesting the model 100 Startup referred to the operating system and the price, which were not the operating system and price of the model 100 but apparently applied to model 10.
This makes it appear that CI reasonably should have known of Startup's mistake. Because the law does not allow one to "snatch up" an offer known to be mistaken. CI snatched up the offer by immediately shipping. This evidences an occasion when unilateral mistake would be an effective defense.
Unilateral mistake is a valid defense, rendering the contract voidable by Startup.
CONDITIONS
An act or event not certain to occur which unless excused, gives rise to or extinguishes a duty to perform under the contract.
1. Express Condition Precedent
In the negotiations, CI's letter of June 5 required payment in full, including shipping, before shipment. As part of the course of dealing, this statement is admissible to show the parties' intent on the issue of time-of-payment.
?11

Excuse of Condition
Waiver
Here, Startup paid only $4,500 for the model 100, which actually sold for $7,000. Because CI accepted the check in part payment and shipped the Model 100 anyway, this was a waiving of the right to insist upon full payment before the duty to ship arose.
2. ImpliedinLaw(Constructive)Condition
A longer performance is a constructive condition precedent on a shorter performance.
Thus, because the delivery of computer would be longer than the performance of paying, the duty of completing delivery must occur first before the duty to pay the balance arises.
Excuse of Condition
Perfect Tender Rule
Startup's duty to pay the balance never arose, because the performance did not occur in conformity to the contract. Here, CI shipped a computer which did not conform in all respects to the contract: the computer ordered was to run on a Delta operating system, but the computer shipped ran on a Gamma operating system. Under the UCC, shipment of a non-conforming goods is still an acceptance but is also breach.
UCC requires perfect tender of performance. The failure of the shipment to conform justifies the buyer to either:
(a) reject the whole,
(b) accept the whole, or
12

(c) accept any commercial unit or units and reject the rest.
There are three exceptions to the perfect tender rule. CI will try to argue for application of an exception:
(a) Delivery is made before the duty to perform is expired. The buyer must notify the seller of the nonconformity and must then give the seller time to cure. However, here the time for performance was not specified by contract and so upon receipt of the goods by Startup, CI had no further time in which to cure.
(b) Installment contract. This is a shipment of only one item and is not an install contract. This exception is inapplicable.
(c) Where the seller ships nonconforming goods, but states that it is only an "accom[m]odation" to the buyer, the buyer may reject the goods, but must give seller reasonable time to cure. Here, the nonconforming goods were shipped without any mention of it being an "accom[m]odation." This exception will not apply.
No exception applies.
Thus, the failure of the sale to conform to the contract excuses the duty of Startup to perform by tendering payment.
BREACH
No duty is likely to be found to have been breached by Startup, due to (1) the fact that the contract is avoidable due to mistake, and (2) the fact that the duty to tender payment of the balance likely did not arise. Thus, Startup will not be found to have breached.
13
?
REMEDIES
General Damages
General damages attempt to compensate for the loss of expectancy under a contract, by placing the nonbreaching party in the position he would have been in had the contract been fully performed. The normal measure of damages for a breach by a buyer is for the seller to recover either (a) the difference between the market price and the contract price, or (b) the profits expected under the contract (particularly when the goods sold are of an unlimited supply).
CI cannot recover general damages where the contract is voidable, and no breach is found.
Restitutionary Damages
Even where the contract is voidable, a plaintiff can recover for the reasonable value of the benefit conferred under the contract.
However, CI cannot recover for the computer in this case, because it has refused to take back the computer when Startup offered to return it. Under the avoidable consequence rule, the plaintiff cannot recover damages which he reasonably could have avoided. Because CI could have avoided the damage of losing their model 100 by accepting its return, and refused to so mitigate, CI cannot recover for its loss.
?14

Question 2
Pete is a salesperson at XYZ Real Estate Company ("XYZ"). Vic owned a parcel of industrial real estate that he wanted to sell. Vic retained Pete as his agent to sell the parcel for him, and they agreed to list the parcel for a price of $100,000. Developer contacted Pete and expressed interest in buying Vic's property.
Pete falsely told Vic that a soils test report revealed serious toxic contamination on the parcel and that, because of high cleanup costs, the most Vic could hope to get for the parcel was $15,000 to $17,000. Vic said, "OK. Do your best."
About a week later, Pete persuaded his friend, Frank, to sign an offer to Vic, offering to pay $17,000 for the parcel. When Frank asked why Pete wanted him to do this, Pete told him, "The actual buyer is traveling in Europe and can't get back in time to sign the papers, so he authorized me to find someone to sign for him. I'm designating you as that person, but, don't worry, you won't be liable for anything." Believing Pete's explanation, Frank agreed to sign out of his friendship with Pete. Pete presented the offer signed by Frank, and Vic accepted it.
Pete, figuring he would temporarily "borrow" $17,000 from XYZ, wrote a check on the XYZ bank account for $17,000 and gave it to Frank to deposit into Frank's account. Frank attended the real estate closing, obtained the deed, and gave Vic his personal check for $17,000. Two days later, Pete sold the property to Developer for $100,000. From the proceeds of that sale, Pete returned the $17,000 to XYZ's account and kept the balance for himself.
1. Of what crimes, if any, can Pete be convicted? Discuss.
2. With what crime might Frank be charged, and is it likely he would be convicted?
Discuss.
3. Is Pete guilty of solicitation?
15

Answer A to Question 2
Solicitation[,] under criminal law, is urging another person to commit an illegal act and /or crime.
Here, Pete urged his friend Frank to make an offer to Vic. On its face this is not an illegal act although it was part of a big illegal fraudulent scheme that Pete was planning. Furthermore, here Frank had no idea that there was any illegal tasks that he was taking part in.
Therefore, Pete is not guilty of solicitation[.]
?????????????2. Are Pete and Frank guilty of conspiracy?
Under criminal law, a conspiracy is formed when 2 or more people agree to commit a criminal act. Conspiracy does not merge with other offenses. Here, as explained above, Frank had no idea that he was helping Pete towards committing a criminal act. And, since conspiracy is a specific intent crime, it would require the person committing it to be aware of the crime. Here although Frank agreed to help Pete but he did not know of the nature and illegality, therefore Frank is not guilty of conspiracy, and since you would need 2 or more guilty minds to commit conspiracy, Pete is not gui[l]ty of conspiracy either[.]
????????????????????????Therefore, they are not guilty of conspiracy[.]
?????????????3. Is Pete guilty of false pretense? For the land?
False pretense is an intentional misrepresentation of material fact causing one to gain title to a property by fraud. It is done with the intention that the other party relies on the false information, and in fact the person does rely on it.
Here, Pete intentionally made a misrepresentation of material facts
because he falsely told Vic that a soils test report revealed serious toxic
16
?????????????????
contamination on the parcel and that, because of high cleanup costs, the most Vic could hope to get for the parcel was $15[,]000 to $17[,]000. Also his actions were intentional for the purpose of inducing the results he wanted, knowing that Vic would rely on it because Pete was the sales agent of Vic and, he knew that Vic would rely on Pete's statements.
Here, Vic did rely on Pete's statements because he said "Do your best" in response to Pete's false statements.
Here, because of the false misrepresentation that [is] explained above, and because of Vic's reliance on the misrepresentation of the materials [sic] facts as Pete expected, Pete was able to proceed with his plans towards obtaining title as explained below.
Here, Pete obtained title to Vic's property because he first had his friend, Frank to purchase it, and then he bought it from Frank at the low price of $17,000. Had he not lied to Vic, Vic would not have accepted the $17,000 offer on the property that he had listed for $100,000. Therefore, Pete obtained the property through false pretenses and he has the title.
4. Is Pete guilty of embezzlement? For the $17,000?
Under criminal law, embe[z]lement is trespassory conversion of a property that one is entrusted with.
Here, Pete was entrusted with money from XYZ because he was able to write checks on the XYZ bank account.
Here, Pete trespassor[il]y converted $17,000 from XYZ because he wrote a check on the XYZ account for $17,000 and gave it to Frank to deposit into Frank's account. Here, Pete will argue that he only "borrowed" the money because he later returned it as he had initial[l]y intended to do so, but this argument will not hold because one who is entrusted with a property can borrow it if and only if he returns the exact item back. In case of money, this
is not true because although the amount may be exact but that does not
17
???????????????????????????????????Therefore, Pete is guilty of false pretense[.]
??????????????????????????????????????
qualify as the same item being returned. Therefore he will be found to have converted the property being money here. Even though it was just for 2 days but it will be considered substantial influence with the property and therefore conversion took place as explained above by giving the mon[e]y to Frank. This conversion was trespassory because it was unauthorized by XYZ.
?????????????Therefore, Pete is guilty of embezzlement[.]
?????????????. Is Pete guilty of larceny? For the $17,000?
Larceny under criminal law is defined as trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with intent to permanently deprive/steal.Here, there was no trespassory taking of the money because Pete was in the pos[s]ession of the $17,000 in the XYZ bank account for which he had signatory rights to withdraw.
Here, there was carrying away because he took the $17,000 and deposited it to Frank's bank account there was personal property because it was for money. Here, he had no intend[sic] to permanently deprive because he intended to return the money.
??????????????????????????Therefore, Pete is not guilty of larceny[.]
?????????????6. Can Frank be guilty of conspiracy?
As explained at the begin[in]g, neither Frank nor Pete are guilty of conspiracy because we don't have two guilty minds here. And note that if they were found guilty, conspiracy would not have merged with other substantive crimes.
????????????????18

7. Is Frank an accomplice?
An accomplice is one which [sic] aids or encourages another in committing a crime. The acts must be done with the knowledge and awareness that the party he is helping is part of an illegal scheme.
Here, although Frank has essentially helped Pete in implementing the fraudulent plan, but he has no idea he is aiding in a criminal act. In some jurisdictions, the mere fact that one party substantially benefits by aiding and abet[t]ing a criminal could be held as a reason to be called an accomplice even though it is done without the knowledge of the crime taking place. But here, not only Frank does not know but he also is not benefiting in any way.
?????????????????????????????Therefore, Frank is not an accomplice[.]
????????????????8. WouldFrankbeguiltyofthecrimescommittedbyPete?
????????An accomplice and/or a party to a conspiracy is guilty of all the crimes committed by the principal in the furtherance of the crime that one [is] foreseeable. However, here Frank is neither an accomplice nor a conspirator as explained above.
??????????????Therefore, Frank will not be guilty of Pete's crimes[.]
????????????????9. Is Frank guilty of rece[i]ving stolen goods?
?????????Receipt of stolen goods is a specific intent crime and since Frank did not know the $17,000 money was stolen he is not guilty of it.
??????????????????In conclusion, Pete is guilty of false pretense and embezzlement; and Frank is not guilty of any crime.
??????????????????Answer B to Question 2
19

2)
SOLICITATION - to commit forgery and uttering
Solicitation is an act of counseling, inciting, or enticing committed with the intent to induce another to commit an illegal act.
Peter told his friend Frank that the actual buyer was traveling in Europe and can't get back in time to sign the papers, so he authorized me to find someone to sign for him. I'm designating you as that person, but you don't have to worry, you won't be liable for anything. When Peter persuaded his friend Frank to sign an offer to Vic, offering to pay $17,000 for Peter's parcel, Peter counseled and incited Frank to commit the crime of forgery and uttering [,] which are illegal acts.
CONSPIRACY - to commit forgery and uttering
Conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an illegal act.
Believing Peter's explanation, Frank agreed to signed [sic] out of his friendship with Peter. When Peter was unable to persuade Frank to sign the papers, Frank agreed to commit forgery. Normally, an agreement to commit an illegal act would [sic] between two or more persons would be a conspiracy. Frank, however, did not know, based on Peter's assurance, that he was committing an illegal act. Since Frank did not have the specific intent to commit an illegal act, at common law, there would be no conspiracy between Frank and Peter.
At common law, Peter would not likely be guilty of conspiracy.
Under the Model Penal Code (MPC), the MPC recognizes a unilateral conspiracy. Peter would likely be guilty of a unilateral conspiracy.
STATE V. PETER
??EMBEZZLEMENT
?20

Embezzlement is the fraudulent conversion of rightfully entrusted personal property with the specific intent to defraud.
Peter, figuring he would temporarily "borrow["] $17,000 from XYZ, wrote a check on the XYZ bank account for $17,000 and gave it to Frank to deposit in Frank[']s account. Since Peter was able to sign a check on the XYZ bank account, Peter would have been a rather high level employee with the firm. Since Peter was a high level employee, when he signed the check for the $17,000, he fraudulent[ly] converted the fund[s] which were entrusted to him, with the specific intent to use those funds to give to Frank and eventually defraud Vic.
Peter will likely be guilty of embezzlement.
LARCENY
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of another's personal property with the specific intent to permanently deprive.
If Peter is not considered to be a high level employee, he would be charged with the crime of larceny rather than embezzlement. Peter used the funds to give to Frank to defraud Vic. The checking account funds were not intended to be used for this purpose[;] thus it was a trespassory taking. Furthermore, when Peter wrote the check to Frank, he "carried away" the funds, which were the property of XYZ. Peter, however, did not have the specific intent to permanently deprive XYZ Real Estate of the funds as evidenced by Peter returning the funds to the XYZ bank account.
Peter will not likely be guilty of larceny as he did not have the specific intent to permanently deprive.
UTTERING
Uttering is the offering as genuine an instrument known to be false with the specific intent to deceive.
Peter had Frank attend the real estate closing, obtained the deed, and gave Vic his personal check for $17,000. When Frank gave Vic the check and obtained the deed, Frank offered the papers for the real estate transaction as if he actually intended
21
??
to purchase the property. As such, Peter used an innocent agent to offer the papers as genuine, knowing them to be false, with the specific intent to deprive Peter of title to his property.
Peter will argue that the papers were in fact genuine and represented a valid agreement for the sale of the parcel.
Peter will likely be guilty of uttering.
FALSE PRETENSES
False pretenses is the procurement of title to property by means of false representation with specific intent to permanently deprive.
MISREPRESENTATION
Misrepresentation is a false statement of material fact knowingly made with the intent to induce plaintiff's reliance, causing plaintiff to justifiably rely thereon and be damaged.
False statement of material fact: Peter falsely told Vic that a soils test report revealed serious toxic contamination on the parcel and that because of high cleanup costs, the most Vic could hope to get for the parcel was $15,000 to [$]17,000. This statement by Peter to Vic was a false statement.
Knowingly made: When Peter falsely told Vic that the soils test report revealed serious toxic contamination on the parcel, Peter knowingly made the false statement to Vic.
Intent to induce reliance: Originally, Peter and Vic agreed that Peter would list Vic's parcel for a list price of $100,000. Peter falsely told Vic the parcel had serious contamination[,] intending to induce Vic's reliance to reduce the price of the parcel.
Causing plaintiff to justifiably rely thereon: Originally, Peter and Vic agreed that Peter would list Vic's parcel for a list price of $100,000. After Peter told Vic that the most Vic could hope to get for the parcel was $15,000 to $17,000, Vic replied, "O.K. Do your best." As such, Vic justifiably relied on the false representation by Peter and reduced the price of the parcel.
22
??
Damages: Peter sold the property which was worth $100,000 for $17,000.
As discussed supra, Peter obtained title to Vic's property by means of false representation. Furthermore, as evidenced by Peter[']s plot and utilization of his friend Frank, [he] utilized the false representation with the specific intent to permanently deprive Vic of his property. Peter then resold the property two days later to a developer for $100,000.
Peter will likely be guilty of false pretenses.
CONSPIRACY
Defined supra
STATE V. FRANK
?Peter told his friend Frank that the actual buyer was traveling in Europe and can't get back in time to sign the papers, so he authorized me to find someone to sign for him. I'm designating you as that person, but you don't have to worry, you won't be liable for anything. Believing Peter's explanation, Frank agreed to sign out of his friendship with Peter. When Peter was able to persuade Frank to sign the papers, Frank agreed to commit forgery. Normally, an agreement to commit an illegal act would [sic] between two or more persons would be a conspiracy. Frank, however, did not know, based on Peter's assurance, that he was committing an illegal act. Since Frank did not have the specific intent to commit an illegal act, at common law, there would be no conspiracy between Frank and Peter.
Frank will not likely be guilty of conspiracy.
23

FORGERY
Forgery is the making or altering of a writing of legal significance with the specific intent to defraud or deceive.
Believing Peter's explanation, Frank agreed to sign out of his friendship with Peter. When Frank signed the paperwork for the real estate transaction, Frank made a writing of legal significance as the paperwork would be used to purchase the parcel from Vic. Furthermore, Frank did not actually intend to purchase the parcel for himself[;] therefore, it was a writing intended to deceive Vic. Frank, however, did not have the specific intent to defraud or deceive Vic; Frank was acting out of his belief of Peter's statements and their friendship.
Frank will not likely be guilty of forgery.
?UTTERING
Defined supra.
?24

Question 3
During a severe thunderstorm, Alice sought shelter inside Walton Grocery Store ("Walton"). Alice slipped on a bunch of grapes that she failed to notice and that had fallen from a display near the entryway. After Alice's fall, witnesses described the grapes as "smashed," "flattened," "squished," and "gritty." The store manager told Alice that the area where Alice's fall occurred had been swept no more than 35 minutes before she fell. As a result of the fall, Alice suffered a broken arm and a broken ankle.
Later that same day Betty, while shopping in Walton, accepted an offer to sample a new product, "Mom's Whole Berry Pie," baked and distributed by Mom's Bakery, Inc. As she was chewing what she thought were blueberries, she bit down on a pebble the size of a blueberry and broke a tooth.
On what legal theories, if any, can Walton be held liable for personal injury to Alice and Betty? Discuss.
25

3)
ALICE V. WALTON
NEGLIGENCE
Answer A to Question 3
?To prevail under negligence, the plaintiff must show duty, breach, causation, and damage.
DUTY
Under the majority Cardozo view, a duty is owed to all foreseeable plaintiffs in the zone of danger. Under the minority Andrews view a duty is owed to all. Here, Alice is a shopper in W's grocery store. Because negligence on the part of W is likely to cause injury to customers, A is a foreseeable plaintiff in the zone of danger and is thus owed a duty. She would be owed a duty under the Andrews view as well.
All people must act as a reasonably prudent person under the circumstances. At common law a landowner's duty of care is based on the plaintiff[']s status as a trespasser, licensee, or invitee.
Invitee
A would be considered an invitee because she was on W's property for the economic benefit of W. W's store is open to the public and therefore A would be a public invitee in that she was in the store during store hours. W will likely argue that because she wasn't in the store for business purposes, she was a trespasser.
26

However, because his store was open to the public, she is likely a public invitee regardless of the reason she was in the store. Because she will probably be considered an invitee, W owes a duty of ordinary care along with a duty to inspect or repair in a reasonable manner[.]
Trespasser.
W will try to argue that A was a trespasser because she was just there for shelter. However, because people often seek shelter in buildings during thunderstorms A has an argument the [sic] she is at least a known trespasser. If she is a known trespasser then W owes her a duty to warn of latent defect on his property that she is not likely to discover. If she is just a trespasser then she is owed no duty at all. However, the court will probably find A has [sic] a[n] invitee and thus W will owe her a higher duty of care.
BREACH
A breach occurs when a person fails to meet their standard of care.
Here, if W failed to find the bunch of grapes that were on the floor and failed to reasonably clean it up, then he will be found to have breached his duty of care. A will argue that the grapes had to have been on the floor a long time in that they were flattened, squished, and gritty. W will argue that the the floor was swept no more than 35 minutes ago. A utility test may be used to determine whether W's conduct was reasonable. The most common test being the learned hand test. Under this test, then [sic] gravity of the harm and probability of the harm is weighed against the social utility of the conduct and the cost of preventing the harm. Here, the gravity of harm caused by smashed grapes on the floor is fairly high in that people could slip, fall, and brake [sic] bones. The probability of that occur[r]ing is high in that many people walk through stores and may not be looking at the floor because they are looking at the products on the shelf[sic]. The social utility of not cleaning up the grapes sooner is probably small in that it would be easy to check the aisles in a more timely manner. The cost of
27

preventing the harm is also low in that W probably will not have to hire another employee solely for the purpose of checking the aisles, but he could have just checked them on a more regular basis. Therefore, because the gravity and probability are probably higher, there is probably a breach on W's part.
CAUSATION
The but-for test is used to check for actual causation. But-for the smashed grapes being left on the floor, A would not have slipped and fell on them and would not have broken her arm or ankle. Therefore actual cause is met.
Proximate cause is the legal theory that extends or limits liability based on intervening causes and foreseeable harm to the plaintiff. Here, there were no intervening causes between the time the grapes were left on the floor and the time A fell and her injuries were foreseeable and therefore proximate cause is met.
DAMAGE
A suffered a broken arm and broken ankle, and thus the damages element is met.
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
If the plaintiff is found to have negligently contributed to her injuries then in this type of jurisdiction it would be a complete bar to her recovery. Here, W will argue that A was negligent in not looking at the floor while she was walking and thus should be a bar to her recovery. However it is probably not reasonable for someone to look at the floor for every step they take and therefore she was probably not contributorily negligent.
28

COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
Most courts, however, use a form of comparative negligence. In a pure comparative neg jurisdiction, A will be able to recovery [sic] up to the level of her negligence, as long as W was at all negligent. In a modified comparative negligence jurisdiction, she would only be able to recover up to the statutory threshold (usually 50 to 51%).
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
A person assumes the risk of their conduct when they have actual knowledge of the risk and understand the risk they are taking, and voluntarily assume it anyway. Here, there are no facts that indicate that A knew of the risk of grapes on the floor. Therefore, she did not voluntarily assume the risk because she did not know she was stepping onto grapes. Therefore, this defense will fail.
BETTY (B) v. WALTON (W)
PRODUCTS LIABILITY
A plaintiff may recover under three general theories of products liability, 1) Strict Liability, 2) Negligence, 3) Warranty.
STRICT LIABILITY
Any commercial supplier that places a defective product into the marketplace is liable for the damage caused by the defective product. They owed this duty to any consumer of the product and to all foreseeable bystanders. They are strictly liable even if they took all reasonably adequate precautions.
PROPER PLAINTIFF
B is a consumer of the sampled berry pie in W's store and thus she is a proper plaintiff.
29

PROPER DEFENDANT
Walton is a retailer and seller of foods and is thus liable under strict liability for products defective when it left there [sic] hands. They may, however, recovery [sic] under indemnification if it was not there [sic] fault. W may argue that he did not sell the goods to B. However, he is a seller of the goods which they offered to B in the hopes they will sell it to her, and thus they are still a proper defendant[.]
DEFECTIVE PRODUCT
A product is defective if it contains a manufacturing defect, design defect, or warning defect.
MANUFACTURING DEFECT
A man[u]fac[t]uring defect is evident when one product of the many that the manufacturer produces contains a defect. Here, the pie contained a pebble the size of a blueberry, which broke her tooth. Under the consumer expectations test, this product would be defective. A reasonable consumer would not expect a blueberry pie to contain a pebble, and thus it would be defective.
CAUSATION
But for the pebble in the pie, B would not have broke [sic] her tooth, and this it was the actual cause of her injuries. Furthermore, because there were no intervening causes the pebble was the direct cause of the injury, and thus was the proximate cause as well.
DAMAGE
B broke her tooth and thus she suffered adequate damage.
30

DEFENSES
Contributory negligence is not a defense under a strict liability theory and thus the only defense available in this cause was assumption of the risk.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
Defined supra.
Here there is no indication the [sic] B knew there was a pebble in the pie and decided to eat it anyway, and thus this defense will fail.
BREACH OF WARRANTY
B may also recover under a warranty theory. EXPRESS WARRANTY
If the seller of a product makes an express warranty about a product and the product fails to stand up to the warranty, then the plaintiff may recover. Here, B may argue that W made an express warranty that the pies were edible in that they were offering samples for eating in their store. If so, then there is a warranty that they are edible and contain no defects. A piece [,] however, contained a pebble and therefore W may have breached an express warranty that the pie was safe for consumption.
IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY
All products contain an implied warranty of merchantability if they [sic] good is sold by a merchant of the kind. Here, W sells blueberry pies and is a merchant of the kind and thus there is an implied warranty that the pie would be fit for its ordinary purpose. B will argue that blueberry pies were made for safe eating and therefore because the piece contained a pebble it was not safe for eating. Therefore the implied warranty of merchantability will be breached by W. W will argue again that he did not
31

sell the product, and therefore is not liable. However, as stated above, this argument will fail. Furthermore, this would fail the consumer expectations test as well.
The implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose will not apply here in that W did not make any statement that B relied upon to make the purchase.
CAUSATION
Supra
DAMAGES
Supra.
DEFENSES
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK Supra. B did not assume the risk. UNFORESEEABLE MISUSE
B did not misuse the product in any way and thus this will not be a defense[.]
NEGLIGENCE/PRODUCTS LIABILITY
DUTY
All commercial suppliers of goods have a duty of due (reasonable) care to all foreseeable plaintiffs.
W is a retailer and thus it will be harder for B to prevail under this theory against W. W has a duty to inspect products only if there is an obvious problem with the product, such as a broken seal or damaged package.
32

BREACH
Supra.
There are no facts that indicate that W was negligent in selling (offering a sample) of the pie. Nothing indicates that there was a reasonable need to inspect the pie in that there is no evidence of obvious dangers.
Had B sued Mom's Bakery she may assert a breach under RES IPSA LOQUITOR as this was something that would only occur because of some negligence, it was under the exclusive control of the manufacturer, and B did not contribute in any way to the injuries.
CAUSATION
There is no indication that W's negligence caused her injuries. DAMAGE
Supra
DEFENSES
B did not assume the risk nor was she contributorily negligent[.]
33

Question 4
Upon completing his PhD studies, Cooper embarked on a nationwide search for a job as an instructor at various universities.
Cooper had an all-day interview on the campus of North University ("NU") in his home state, State A. At the conclusion of the interview, the dean of NU offered Cooper a position as a tenure-track assistant professor. Cooper accepted immediately, and the dean told him a written contract with details would be sent to him shortly.
Cooper received the written contract from NU, read it carefully, and confirmed that the position title, tenure-track status, salary, and courses to be taught were all in conformity with the oral agreement he and the NU dean had agreed upon. He signed the contract and returned it.
Several months before the beginning of the school year, the NU dean called Cooper and informed him that he had been assigned to the newly-opened State B campus of NU and that he would need to move to State B prior to the start of the September term. Cooper was unaware that NU had opened the new campus in State B. There had been no mention of the State B campus during his interview. The written contract that Cooper signed did not indicate at which campus he would be teaching.
Cooper refuses to move to State B, which is over 1,000 miles away from the State A campus.
Cooper sues NU for breach of contract, and NU cross-complains, alleging an implied term in the NU/Cooper contract that Cooper would teach at either of the NU campuses, seeking a decree of specific performance requiring Cooper to teach at the State B campus.
How should the court rule on:
1. Cooper's breach of contract claim? Discuss.
2. NU's request for specific performance? Discuss.
34

4)
Answer A to Question 4
Cooper (C) v. NU (N)
??CHOICE OF LAW
A contract for the sale of goods is governed by the UCC, whereas a contract for services is governed by the common law. This contract was an employment contract and is thus governed by the common law as well as any statutory employment acts.
CONTRACT
A contract is formed when there is mutual assent (offer and acceptance), and consideration or some substitute for it.
OFFER
An offer is a manifestation of present intent to be bound that contains definite and certain terms. It creates the power of acceptance in the offeree. At common law, the required terms were quantity, time for performance, identification of parties, price, and subject matter.
Here, NU offered a tenured track position that contained all the essential terms. It contained the quantity (one job), time (next school year), parties (C and N), subject matter (tenured professor) and price (the offered salary). Therefore this is a valid offer.
ACCEPTANCE
An acceptance is a manifestation of agreement to the terms of the offer in the manner required and intended by the offer. Here, C agreed to all the terms, read it
35

carefully, signed it, and returned it. Therefore he objectively and subjectively agreed to the terms of the offer and thus there is a valid acceptance.
CONSIDERATION
Consideration is a bargained[-]for exchange with either a benefit to the promisor or detriment to the promisee but usually both.
Here, the consideration was a tenured track job bargained for a salary. This contains the necessary bargain and detriment elements. C gained employment, and N gave up money for salary.
DEFENSES TO FORMATION
STATUTE OF FRAUDS
The statute of frauds requires that certain contracts be in writing and signed by the party to be charged. Here, theoretically, the contract was for a tenure track position. However, because C could possible [sic] perform within a year (as there is no stated number of years) this contract does not fall within the statute. If it did fall within the statute (if the tenured position was meant to be for more than one year and there is no way that N could have fired him before the year was up), the contract was signed in a writing and thus satisfied the statute.
MISTAKE
C may be able to defend on the grounds of unilateral mistake. If one party is mistaken as to a material fact of the contract and they didn't assume the risk of the mistake, and the non-mistaking party knew or had reason to know of the mistake, then a contract may be excused. Here, if the court finds there was an implied term, then C will argue that he was mistaken about that fact. C will argue that it was material in that it required him to move 1,000 miles away. Furthermore he will claim that he didn't assume the risk in that there was no indication in the interview that he would be
36

required to move to State B and it wasn't indicated in the contract. N should have known about the mistake in that they didn't mention it in the contract nor include it in the contract. It could be a reasonable assumption that if it wasn't specified in the contract then it wasn't included in the contract. If, however, the term was implied and relied upon by N then the mistake defense would not prevail.
PERFORMANCE OF THE CONTRACT
IMPLIED TERMS
Usually courts will look to course of dealing, course of performance, or usage of trade to imply a term under a sales contract. Under a service contract a court may do something similar and look to past employment contracts of the school and within college tenured track contracts in general. If the court finds that it is customary or very usual to imply that term, then they may insert it. It must be reasonable[,] however. A contract will generally not fail if a reasonable term may be implied into the contract.
UNCONSCIONABLE
If the term was implied, but unconscionable, then the court may strike that term and enforce the rest of the contract. A term is unconscionable if it was so one [-] sided that it would be unfair to enforce the contract. Here, it was probably not procedurally unconscionable in that there seems to be no unfairness in the bargaining. C will argue that implying that term would be unconscionable. He would argue that forcing him to move over a thousand miles away without notice that he would be assigned to that campus is so one[-]sided that it would be unfair to enforce it. Forcing C to accept a contract that requires him to move a thousand miles away without notice may very well be unconscionable, and thus unenforceable.
MODIFICATION
At common law a modification of a contract requires new consideration to be binding, unless there were unforeseen[n] circumstances that came to be that would
37

make it fair and equitable for the modification to take place. Here, a contract was formed on the terms of the contract. The contract did not state that C will be assigned to State B and because it would probably be unconscionable to force C to move a thousand miles without prior notice, the contract is formed on the stated terms. N trying to modify would be to no avail as there was no new consideration. N will probably [be] found to have assumed the risk by not mentioning the specific place of employment in the contract[.]
ANTICIPATORY REPUDIATION
An unequivocal statement by one party that they will not perform there [sic] side of the contract gives grounds to the other side to suspend performance and sue for breach, or wait a reasonable amount of time [and] then sue for breach. Here, by informing C that he would have to move, C may argue that it was an unequivocal statement that they would not perform and thus C would then have a right to not perform and sue.
PAROL EVIDENCE
The court will probably find that the contract was an intended final integration of the contract and thus no prior or contemporaneous oral evidence may be allowed. If it was only a partial ingeration [sic] in that place of performance was ambiguous, then the court may allow introduction of course of performance, course of dealing, and usage of trade to sort out ambiguities.
10.SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE
Specific performance of a contract is only allowed w[h]ere there would not be an adequate damages (money) remedy at law. Fu[r]thermore, courts will not use specific performance if it was a unique good or it would be hard to supervise the remedy. The[sic] will generally only allow them in employment contracts if there was a trade secret or covenant not to compet[e]. Courts generally do not allow specific performance
38

in employment situations to avoid possible constitutional issues relating to involuntary servitude.
Here, the court will probably find that N breached the contract by anticipatorily repudiating the contract and there was no implied term. It will probably not grant specific performance in that this is an employment contract and would find it hard to enforce or supervise. C had no trade secrets and there was no covenant not to compete[.] The remedy will probably be rescission of the contract based on the mistake that C made that N should have known [it] might be relied upon. Furthermore, if N prevails, they would probably only recover the cost of finding substitute employment and other reasonably foreseeable consequential (Hadely v. Baxendale) damages.
??END OF EXAM
39

Answer B to Question 4
HOW SHOULD THE COURT RULE ON COOPER'S BREACH OF CONTRACT CLAIM?
Contract
Is a promise or set of promises, the breach of which the law provides a remedy.
This is an employment contract, therefore common law rules apply.
Offer
Is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent to [be] bound by definite and certain terms communicated to the offeree.
After Cooper's interview with NU (Northern University), the Dean offered Cooper a position as a tenure track assistant professor. The facts are not specific as to salary but has the necessary terms for an offer and we will assume the missing terms exist.
Acceptance
Is an unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer communicated to the offeror. Per the facts Cooper immediately accepted the Dean's offer.
Written Confirmation
Cooper received the written contract from NU. He read it to ensure all the necessary terms and previous oral agreement were contained within. This contract indicated the position title, tenure status, salary and courses to be taught. Cooper signed and returned it to NU.
40
??????
Consideration
Is that for which it is bargained for in exchange of legal detriment.
Cooper's consideration is his teaching at NU in return for his salary and NU's consideration is getting Cooper to teach and they will pay him the salary.
Therefore, there is consideration on both sides and a valid contract exists.
Parol evidence
A final written contract cannot later have oral testimony to contradict terms of the written offer.
Per the facts, when Cooper interviewed at State A's campus, there was no mention of a State B campus. Nor does the written contract mention anything about Cooper going to teach at State B's campus. Cooper's argument here is over a missing term or detail of the written contract indicating state designation.
Therefore, there is no contradiction between Cooper's statements and the written contract so Cooper will be allowed to introduce evidence and statements interpreting the true meaning of the contract as it pertains to the missing term.
Mutual mistake
Is where both parties err on a term of a contract.
Cooper believes that he is going to be working at State A campus while NU believes he will be working at State B campus which is 1,000 miles away. This is a material difference to the believed contract and the mistake is on both sides.
41
???
Therefore, since there is no true meeting of the minds, there is no mutual assent and Cooper may avoid the contract.
Ambiguity
Is an uncertainty to a term of a contract.
At the time of contract formation, Cooper was aware of only one NU campus which was the one in State A which he applied and interviewed at. When being notified Cooper [sic] of the State B campus it was newly opened and Cooper was unaware of the campus. In fact there was no mention of the State B campus during the interview. Furthermore, the written contract Cooper signed made no mention as to a State B campus.
NU will argue that the job position was working for the university more so than a location and that as Cooper's potential employer, he would have to work at whichever campus they had a need for him and at this time it is at Campus B.
Cooper will argue that campus knew of State B, however, failed to mention it to him and that by him being an innocent party to the ambiguity, his interpretation shall be used.
Therefore, Cooper may be able to teach at Campus A because of the ambiguity.
Unsconscionability
The court may choose not to enforce a portion of a contract or the entire contract if it is found to be oppressive and incomprehensible.
Cooper will ask that he remain at State A where he interviewed, lives and was aware of being the only campus for NU. He will further argue that it is unreasonable for him to move 1,000 miles to help staff NU's State B campus.
42
??
If the court feels that this forced move is oppressive to Cooper, he may avoid that term.
Modification
Is an agreement between the contracting parties to modify a contract and it requires consideration.
Per the facts, Cooper is intending to teach at Campus A. He feels that this is the true contract and if he wins his arguments as discussed above, he will be granted his position at the State A campus. For NU, to get Cooper to teach at Campus B would be a modification of their current contract and in doing so would require mutual assent to the modification as well as new consideration.
Breach
Is a failure to perform that goes to the essence of the contract.
Several months before the beginning of school, NU's Dean called Cooper and told him that he had been assigned to the newly opened State B campus which is over 1,000 miles away and told Cooper that he would have to move there to be able to teach by September.
Cooper's expectations were that he would teach at NU's State A campus which is in his home state and near his house. NU was not going to allow Cooper to teach at the State A campus as they had contracted.
Rescission
The court may use the equitable relief of rescission to place the parties in the position they would [be] in had the contract never been formed.
43
???
Since Cooper does not want to go to State B and NU only wants him to teach at State B, they may both choose to rescind the contract by which neither party will have a duty to perform.
Therefore, the court may find that the original contract with its implied assumption will allow Cooper to work in his position at the State A campus.
HOW SHOULD THE COURT RULE ON NU'S REQUEST FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE?
Specific Performance is a court-ordered remedy generally retained for property injunctions and employment contracts. However, in employment contracts it is used as injunctive relief for one employer losing its trade secrets to its competitor through an employee. There are no special relations between Cooper and NU to [sic] as he would have special knowledge of their trade secrets. Furthermore, they are seeking to force Cooper to work for them. It is illegal and against public polity to use the courts for forced services. NU will also be able to seek other proper remedies other than Cooper's involuntary servitude.
Impracticability
If a contract isn't practical to perform, the court may excuse its duty to perform.
Cooper lives near the State A campus and has grown up in that town, he wants to live in that town. For him to uproot and move to State B would be very detrimental to him socially and economically because he would have to sell his home, leave his friends and family, and move over 1,000 miles away to State B campus. This would be a grievous hardship and very impractical for Cooper.
NU will argue that it is not impractical for Cooper to move[;] however, for Cooper to keep his professor position with NU he would have to move and teach at Campus B.
44
?
NU has several months to locate a professor for their State B campus and they can easily advertise and locate someone to take the position rather than attempt to force Cooper into moving to and teaching at State B. There, NU does not have any damages and has other relief available to them.
45



??California First-Y ear Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2007
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2007 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2007 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Contracts 1 Criminal Law 9 T orts 21 Contracts 32
???i

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?ii

Question 1
Daisy was driving on the streets of City to meet her friend Sally for a lunch date.
Realizing that she might be late for the lunch date and, while still driving, Daisy decided to call Sally on her cell phone to let her know that she was running late. While dialing Sally's telephone number, Daisy lost control of her car and hit a telephone pole. The pole broke, fell over, and rolled down the street.
About a block away, the pole rolled toward Frisky, a cat, who was walking across the street. Fearing for Frisky's safety, nine-year-old Owen, Frisky's owner, ran into the street, jumped in front of the moving pole, and pushed the startled Frisky out of its path. Unfortunately, the pole ran over Owen's leg and crushed it. Owen will need medical treatment for these injuries for the rest of his life.
Prior to these events, City had passed an ordinance forbidding the use of a cell phone by an automobile driver while driving. The ordinance was passed in response to community concerns that cell phone use while driving is distracting and causes motor vehicle accidents. The penalty for a violation of the ordinance is $100.
On what theory or theories might an action for damages be brought on behalf of Owen against Daisy, what defenses, if any, might Daisy assert, and what is the likely result? Discuss fully.
1

Owen (O) vs Daisy (D)
Answer A to Question 1
?Owen (O) may bring an action against Daisy (D) under the theory of Negligence. To bring an action under this, O will have to prove that D owes him a duty, which is breach and the breach of D's duty was the actual and proximate cause of his injury.
Duty of D
As a road user, D owes all other road users the ordinary duty of care to drive safely so as not to cause any accident and thus injuries to the road users like drivers and pedestrians.
D's use of the hand phone while driving was the very reason that caused her to lose control of her car and hit on the telephone post. Such use of hand phone while driving was against the ordinance by the city.
Here, O might use D's violation of the statutes to establish negligence.
In a majority of the states violation of statutes is negligence per se while in minority of states, it's just evidence of negligence. Even in the former, O will have to prove that the violation was I) unexcused II) the type of harm he suffered is that the statute is aimed to prevent III) and that O is the group of people under which the statute aimed to protect.
(1) It is apparent that D's violation of the statute is not excused in that calling a friend that she might be late is not an emergency and the type of harm she created is not justified by her need to make that call, no matter how urgent she deemed it to be. In any case, she could always drive to the side of the road, stop her car at a safe place to make her phone call if there is such an urgency.
(2) Apparently the very reason the statute was passed was due to the incident, caused by distracted drivers who were using hand phones while driving. Hence it's the type of harm that statute is trying to prevent.
(3) O, being the road user, is the type of people the statute is trying to protect.
Actual Cause:
O suffers a crushed leg as a result. Had it not been for the negligence of D, O would not have suffered the injury. But-for the negligence of D, O would not have suffered the injury hence D is the actual cause of his injury.
2
??
Proximate Cause:
O is clearly a foreseeable plaintiff within the zone of danger for the harm created by O. At the same time the type of harm is created by D is foreseeable and it follows the unbroken chain of events starting from D's negligence. And the harm of injury on person by a rolled up pole is not highly ordinary and bizarre in hindsight. Hence D is the proximate cause of O's injury.
Damages:
O suffered a crushed leg. He is able to claim the pain and suffering (which the court will try to put a monetary value on it) and medical expenses, present and future. For future medical expenses, he might need expert witnesses to estimate the type of medical care needed and the cost.
Defenses:
Contributory negligence
D might claim that O is contributing negligence. In that he had acted unreasonably by running onto the road and jumping in front of the rolling poll. Whether the child has acted reasonably is judged according to a child of like age and experience. If D can successfully claim that O is contributorily negligent, O collects nothing even if he is established to be only 1% negligent. However, it is not unreasonable that an owner of the cat come to the rescue of the cat if he sees that the cat's in danger of imminent injury. So it would appear that O has acted reasonably.
Comparative negligence
In a pure comparative negligence state, a plaintiff's claim for damage is proportionately reduced by his own negligence.
In a modified comparative negligence state if the plaintiff is established to be more than 50% negligent, he collects nothing.
It would appear here that D was not negligent in coming to the rescue of a cat so D is unlikely to succeed here.
Assumption of Risk:
If plaintiff knows of the danger and voluntarily accepts it, then he collects nothing. Here, D may argue that by running onto the road O is aware of the risk of being injured by a car, hence he has knowingly assumed the risk of being injured. There is no evidence that there are other cars on the road. At the same time O can counter argue that he assumed the role of a rescuer as peril, potential injury to his cat attracts his instinctive reaction of wanting to rescue the cat. Whether
3
??????
rescuing a cat, an animal, is the same as a person is the same is for the court to decide. If O is successful in establishing his status as a rescuer, then assumption of risk is irrelevant and he can still claim. Even if not, it's not unreasonable for a 9-year old child under an instinctive reaction to rescue his cat, the actual knowledge and full comprehension of the possible risk that he might face can be challenged.
4

1)
QUESTION 1
Owen v. Daisy
Answer B to Question 1
Owen will bring a negligence action against Daisy, claiming that her conduct created an unreasonable risk of harm that caused his injury. The basic elements he must prove are duty, standard of care, breach of duty, actual and proximate causation, and proof of his damages.
1. Duty/standard of care: The basic duty rule is that one acting reasonably has duty of care to avoid harm to all foreseeable plaintiffs. Thus, Daisy must act reasonably to ensure that her driving does not result in harm to others.
2. Breach of duty? A key question is whether Daisy's actions in driving her car breached the basic duty she owed to foreseeable plaintiffs. There are several standard approaches to demonstrating that conduct is unreasonable. One is the Learned Hand Formula, in which the Benefit to the defendant for her conduct is weighed against the Probability of the harm she might cause and the Magnitude of that harm.
Negligence per se: Breach of duty may also be found where the defendant has violated a statute. For this standard, the statute must have been intended to protect against the type of harm caused, the plaintiff must be in the class of persons the statute was designed to protect, and the violation must not have been excused.
- Purpose: The facts indicate that the city had an ordinance banning use of cell phone by the driver of an automobile while driving. It is clear that the purpose of the statute was to avoid automobile accidents caused when a driver is distracted by use of the cell phone. Here, Daisy was dialing her cell phone while she was driving, and as a result lost control of her car. Her vehicle then struck a telephone pole. So her accident was clearly the type of conduct that the statute was intended to protect against.
-Plaintiff: The statute does not specify the exact class of plaintiffs intended to be protected. However, it is likely that it was intended to protect against all classes who could foreseeably be harmed by a motor vehicle accident. This could include personal injury to other motorists, to the passengers in the same vehicle, and to pedestrians; it would also include property damage resulting from the accident. Owen was a pedestrian, and therefore was in the class intended to be protected.
-Violation excused? There are no facts that would indicate that Daisy's violation of the statute would be excused. For example, Daisy was not operating under any emergency situation which necessitated her use of the cell
5
?
phone. Instead, she was simply trying to call her friend Sally to inform her that she was running late. Therefore, the violation was not excused.
Therefore, Daisy's violation of the statute would suffice to prove breach of duty under the negligence per se standard.
3. Causation:
a. Actual case: It is clear that but for Daisy's actions, Owen would not have been harmed. Daisy's car hit the telephone pole and knocked it over, causing it to roll down the street and ultimately hit Owen. Therefore, Daisy was the cause in fact of Owen's injuries.
b. Proximate cause: A more difficult question is whether Daisy's actions were the proximate cause of Owen's injuries. Was it foreseeable that her car accident would result in Owen being struck by a telephone pole more than a block away from the accident? There are two key elements that need to be examined:
1) Foreseeable type of harm? Owen's injuries were not caused by Daisy's car hitting him. Instead, he was struck by a telephone pole that Daisy's car had knocked over. Is this type of harm foreseeable from an auto accident caused by driver being distracted through cell phone use? While traditional common law held that a plaintiff was liable for all results of his conduct (Polemus rule), the modern majority rule is that the type of harm must be foreseeable. Daisy will argue that it was not foreseeable that her car would knock down the telephone pole, causing it to roll down the street. However, telephone poles commonly occur on streets, and it is therefore likely that a motor vehicle could crash into the pole. It is also likely that the pole could be knocked over (although plaintiff may have a claim against the City or telephone company for their negligence in maintenance of the telephone poles), and that the pole could roll down the street. Therefore, this type of harm could be foreseeable.
1) Foreseeable plaintiff? Was Owen a foreseeable plaintiff because he was more than a block away from the accident? Again, there are two approaches that courts have taken. The majority Cardozo rule is that the foreseeable plaintiff must be in the zone of danger. The Andrews dissent view is that the defendant owes a duty of care to all foreseeable plaintiffs. Here, it may be found that Owen was too far away to be considered to be in the zone of danger. However, motor vehicle accidents may result in a chain reaction of events, such as this, that cause injuries. Owen is arguably a foreseeable plaintiff.
6

4. Damages
Owen's leg was crushed, and he will need medical treatment for the rest of his life. He will easily be able to document his injuries, meeting this requirement of the case.
5. Defenses
Daisy may claim either that Owen's own negligence contributed to the
injury, or that he assumed the risk of the injury by running out into the street.
Comparative negligence: The majority of jurisdictions follow the rule that a plaintiff's own negligence which resulted in the accident will reduce the recovery in proportion to the fault. In pure comparative negligence jurisdiction, it does.
Was Owen negligent in running out into the street? Owen's conduct will be judged on the child standard of care - where his behavior will be compared against a child of like age, education and experience. Was it unreasonable for a 9 year old with Owen's background to run out into the street to rescue his pet cat? A key question for the jury to decide is whether a reasonable child of that background and age would be able to understand the risk involved. His actions may have been more instinctual to rescue his beloved pet Frisky.
In addition, it is also true that creation of peril (such as that caused by Daisy's accident) invites a rescue, so a jury may not find that Owen was negligent.
Assumption of the risk: Alternatively, Daisy may argue that Owen assumed the risk of his own injuries by running out in the street to rescue the cat. Daisy would need to prove that Owen recognized and understood the risk, and voluntarily assumed the risk in taking his actions. Again, the child standard will be used in evaluating whether a child of 9 would have truly comprehended the potential risk to himself in running out in front of the telephone pole. The facts seem to indicate that Owen recognized a risk to his pet cat, and that he was trying to rescue the cat. However, that does not mean that he fully comprehended that he was risking his own life in doing that. It seems more likely that 9 year old would be acting instinctively to save his pet, and would not in that short period of time be able to reflect on the possible risk to himself. Without that level of understanding of the risk, Owen could not have voluntarily faced the risk.
If the jury finds that Owen was also negligent, then his damages will be reduced
7

in proportion to the fault assigned to him. [The minority rule of contributory negligence would be a complete bar to Owen's recovery.]
CONCLUSION: Daisy would be liable for Owen's injuries due to her negligence, but the damages she may have to pay could be reduced if the jury finds that Owen was also negligent.
8

Question 2
Victor and Debra were dealers of cocaine, which they brought into the United States from South America in Debra's private plane. On a trip from South America, while Debra was flying her plane, it crashed in a snowy mountainous area in California. Victor was rendered unconscious in the crash. The cocaine they had obtained in South America was hidden inside Victor's coat. Debra, who was uninjured, put on Victor's coat and left to seek help.
Eventually, Debra came to a farmhouse with a truck parked outside. She decided to steal the truck. When she opened its door, however, she found an anti-theft device locked onto the steering wheel. Since this would make it difficult to steal the truck, she decided not to steal the truck after all and called a taxi cab from a roadside telephone a short distance from the farmhouse.
Carl, the cab driver, turned out to be a local drug dealer whom Debra knew. Debra agreed to sell Carl the cocaine she had brought from South America so that he could distribute it. He drove her to his house, where they discussed and finalized the deal. Debra then remembered about Victor, and notified the authorities of the plane crash. By the time the plane wreckage was reached, Victor had died. The authorities concluded that if help had arrived earlier, Victor likely could have been saved.
Carl sold all the cocaine he had obtained from Debra. Unbeknownst to either of them, in South America a strong chemical had been sprayed on the plants that were used to produce the cocaine. As a result, after using the cocaine twenty of the people who purchased the cocaine became seriously ill and all died. Carl has fled the jurisdiction.
What crimes, if any, has Debra committed, and what defenses might she assert? Discuss fully.
9

2)
The People v. Debra (D)
Answer A to Question 2
?Conspiracy
Conspiracy is when an agreement is made between 2 or more people with the specific intent to commit unlawful acts, or commit lawful acts in an unlawful manner.
Conspiracy to import illegal drugs and sell them
The facts don't clearly state that Debra and Victor agreed to sell cocaine; however, since they acted together in bringing the drugs into the United States (US), traveling together to South America using Debra's private plane, they are likely to be found to have conspired. Importing illegal drugs is an unlawful act and so Debra (and Victor) conspired to import illegal drugs when they agreed to bring cocaine into the US.
Importation of illegal drugs
Importing illegal drugs is an unlawful act. Debra imported cocaine into the US.
Carrying of illegal drugs
The asportation of illegal drugs is unlawful.
Victor's coat had cocaine in it. Debra wore that coat when she left to seek help for Victor. Therefore, she is liable for the carrying of illegal drugs.
Attempt
Attempt is found where there is a specific intent to carry out a crime, and a substantial step has been made to perpetrate that crime.
Attempted Larceny
Larceny is the taking and carrying away of another's property with the specific intent to permanently deprive.
Debra had the specific intent to steal the truck since "she decided to steal the truck." Debra opened the door of the truck and completed the taking element of larceny. However, discouraged by the anti-theft device locked onto the steering wheel, Debra did not carry away the truck. Therefore, D will not be found guilty for larceny.
Since Debra took a substantial step in completing the crime by opening the door of the truck, she knew it was wrong to take the truck without permission since she had "decided to steal the truck" and therefore had the requisite state of mind,
10

and her approach to truck and opening of door of truck would be found to be beyond the preparation phase of larceny, and into the perpetration phase of larceny. Since her act was not complete, Debra can only be found guilty of attempted larceny.
Homicide
Homicide is the killing of a human being by another human being.
Omission of duty
One is usually not responsible for crimes he doesn't commit, crimes he doesn't participate in the perpetration of, or crimes where he has had no affirmative duty, and that one is not required to act to save someone. However, if it is found that he had a special relationship with someone being injured, he may be required to act to help that injured person. If he doesn't act where a special duty is found, he can be found liable for that crime. Therefore, one is required to act if there exists a special relationship between the parties.
Debra left Victor unconscious at the site of the plane crash. Although she initially went for help, she delayed on her quest for help and left Victor where he eventually died. If there exists a special relationship between Victor and D, D may be liable for his death.
Since Victor and Debra may be found to have been business partners, or to have been involved in a joint venture, D may be found to have a special relationship with Victor and was required to help him when he was injured.
D initially went to Victor's aid by looking to get help for him. But, D got sidetracked on her quest for help and even forgot about him since the facts say she eventually "remembered about Victor" and so delayed getting V the necessary help. Even though she eventually "notified the authorities" about the plane crash and they got to Victor, V died. The authorities even concluded that Victor could have likely been saved indicating that D's omission to get help in a timely manner actually and proximately caused Victor's death.
Murder is the unlawful killing of another human being with malice aforethought. For a finding of malice there must exist an intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily harm, commission of an inherently dangerous felony, or a wanton disregard for human life.
D did not intend to kill V or intend to cause serious bodily harm, and she even initially went to get him help. D may be seen to have a wanton disregard for human life since she forgot about her ailing unconscious business partner and instead made plans to commit more crimes. If the importation and selling of
11

drugs is an inherently dangerous felony then Debra could be found guilty of murder.
Murder in the 1st degree requires premeditation and deliberation; ambush, torture, bomb; special statutes calling such behavior murder in the first degree or an inherently dangerous felony. If none of these are found, then D may be found to be guilty of 2nd degree murder which is residually defined from first degree murder or statutorily defined.
If D is found to not have any malice aforethought, then D will be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter.
Involuntary manslaughter is where an unintended death occurs from criminal negligence or from the commission of a malum in se misdemeanor.
If conspiracy to import and importation of drugs is found to be a malum in se misdemeanor, then misdemeanor - manslaughter rule applies and D will be found liable for Victor's death.
Otherwise, D's leaving of Victor at crash site will result in criminal negligence and she will be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter.
Malum in se - misdemeanor manslaughter rule involuntary manslaughter
Solicitation - intention to induce another to commit or assist with commission of crime.
Facts don't stipulate that Debra induced Carl. Rather seems like Carl solicited Debra since Debra "agreed" to sell Carl cocaine.
There is another Conspiracy to sell drugs (defined above) this time between Debra and Carl. Debra and Carl "drove to his house, where they discussed and finalized the deal."
Accomplice liability - one is responsible for all crimes he helped commit in the planning or perpetration stage even if he didn't actually commit them.
Pinkerton's Rule
Pinkerton's Rule says that one member of a conspiracy is liable for all crimes of other conspiracy members that are committed in furtherance of the agreed upon crime.
Debra is liable for drugs that Carl sells now according to Pinkerton's Rule, and accomplice liability.
12

Homicide, murder defined above.
D is liable for people dying because of sprayed drugs.
Debra didn't have a specific intent to kill those 20 people, but maybe a wanton disregard for human life by selling drugs, or if selling drugs is an inherently dangerous felony, then she will be found guilty of murder.
Murder rule then 1st degree
If there exist drug trade statutes making selling drugs a 1st degree murder classification then D may be liable. If not, then if her actions are an inherently dangerous felony, then she would be liable in the 1st degree. If not, then 2nd degree murder.
If no malice is found, then D will be held liable for involuntary manslaughter according to the misdemeanor manslaughter rule (defined above) or from criminal negligence in selling an illegal substance that caused people to die.
Defenses
Mistake of fact
Debra will argue that she didn't know the coat had drugs in it. Not likely since she knew what Victor and she were doing in South America. Also, as a coconspirator, she would be liable.
Attempted larceny
Debra will argue that she didn't have the requisite mens rea to commit larceny. Although the facts stipulate that Debra "decided to steal the truck" perhaps she had planned to return the truck and thus the element of specific intent to permanently deprive of larceny wouldn't be found.
Necessity
A necessity may be found to justify a crime.
If attempted larceny found - then D will argue that there was a necessity to take the truck so she could go find help for Victor.
No duty
She will argue that she is not liable for death of Victor because no relationship special relationship to act existed.
Not the proximate cause
She will argue that she is not liable for death of 20 people because she had no involvement in selling those drugs. Not true since she sold drugs to Carl.
13
?
Mistake of fact
D will argue that she had no idea and could have no idea about chemical sprayed on cocaine.
14

2)
Answer B to Question 2
CRIMES DEBRA COMMITTED
LARCENY OF THE COCAINE
Larceny is the taking & carrying away of the personal property of another without consent and with the specific intent to permanently deprive.
Here, D puts V's coat on and since the cocaine was hidden in V's coat, D takes the coat. Furthermore, D left to seek help, therefore there was the movement of the cocaine, therefore asportation and a carrying away of the cocaine. However since D & V were dealers of the cocaine and the facts don't indicate whether the cocaine belonged to V or D or both, D may not be charged with larceny since she can't steal her own personal property. If the cocaine belonged to V then it is the property of another. In this instance, V is unconscious; therefore the cocaine is taken without his consent. And finally, since D left to seek help, it sounds like she might be back, and the facts don't indicate that she intends to permanently deprive V of the cocaine when she takes it; therefore there is no specific intent to permanently deprive.
However, since she took the cocaine, and then decides to sell to Carl, there is a continuing trespass.
In conclusion, if the cocaine is the property of V, D will be charged with larceny.
ATTEMPTED LARCENY OF THE TRUCK
Larceny is the taking & carrying away of the personal property of another without consent and with specific intent to permanently deprive.
Attempted larceny is the specific intent to commit larceny accompanied by an overt act in furtherance of the crime.
Here, Debra (hereafter D) cannot steal the truck because of an anti-theft device; therefore, there is no taking or carrying away. Further, the truck is parked outside a farmhouse and does not belong to D; therefore it is the personal property of another. In this case, D opens the door of the truck and decides that it would be difficult to steal; however, by opening the door, she made an overt act in furtherance of the crime. Moreover, since there is an anti-theft device, D taking of the truck would be without the consent of the owner. Finally, D decided to steal the truck; therefore D has the specific intent to deprive.
In conclusion, since D has the specific intent to take the truck and she goes as 15
?
far as she can before she decides not to steal the truck, therefore she will be charged with attempted larceny of the truck.
Defenses
PRIVATE NECESSITY
Under threat of injury of death from natural source, a D commits a crime.
Here, D will assert that she was seeking b/c Victor was unconscious because of the plane crash. Further she needed to take the truck to get help because the plane had crashed in a snowy mountainous area and not just any automobile would do.
In conclusion, since D did not seek help from anyone in the farmhouse, her defense will not succeed.
FACTUAL IMPOSSIBILITY
When a Defendant cannot commit a crime because of the factual impossibility, it will not serve as a defense as long as the mens rea was present.
Here, D decided to steal the truck and had it not been for the anti-theft device, she would have; therefore she had the requisite intent and a factual impossibility will not succeed as a defense.
In conclusion, since D has the requisite mens rea, her defense will not succeed.
HOMICIDE
A killing of one human by another.
Here, 20 people are dead. Therefore there is a homicide.
ACTUAL CAUSATION
"But for" the Defendant's conduct, the Victim would still be alive.
Here, but for Debra selling the cocaine to Carl, the 20 victims would still be alive. Therefore Debra is the actual cause of the 20 deaths.
PROXIMATE CAUSATION
Analysis of whether the death was a natural and probable result of the D's conduct or whether the death was a foreseeable result of the D's conduct.
Here, since death occurs after ingesting cocaine, Debra is the proximate cause of the deaths.
16
?
However, Debra will defend that the strong chemical spray was a superseding, intervening force that she did not know about and could not have foreseen. Since Debra is a dealer of cocaine who regularly brings it back from South America to the United States, she will be found liable since pesticides being sprayed on plants is foreseeable.
In conclusion, Debra is the actual and proximate cause of the 20 people who died as a result of ingesting the cocaine.
MALICE
Malice can be expressed or implied.
EXPRESS MALICE
An outward manifestation of the intent to kill;
Here, there is no express malice.
IMPLIED MALICE
Can be shown by an intent to kill, intent to do serious bodily injury, a wanton/reckless disregard for a high risk of death, or Felony Murder.
Here, there is no implied malice; therefore it will be necessary to analyze the deaths under manslaughter.
MANSLAUGHTER
An unlawful killing of a human being without malice aforethought. Manslaughter can be involuntary or voluntary.
Here, since there is no malice on Debra's part (see above), she committed manslaughter.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
An unintentional killing during a non-enumerated felony, during a misdemeanor, or by way of criminal negligence - a gross deviation from what a reasonable person would do in the same or similar circumstances.
Here, D did not intend to kill anyone; therefore there is an unintentional killing. However, if D's crime of selling cocaine is a misdemeanor or a felony (non- enumerated for purposes of felony murder rule), she will be found to have committed involuntary manslaughter.
17

CONSPIRACY TO DISTRIBUTE DRUGS
A conspiracy is an agreement between two people to commit a crime. It is a specific intent crime and does not merge with the more serious crime.
Here, D agreed to sell Carl the cocaine; therefore there are two people, Debra and Carl. Furthermore, Carl & D discussed and finalized the deal at her house, and although the facts don't indicate the details of the deal, D did not give Carl the cocaine, and since she is receiving something from the deal, the two of them have an agreement.
PINKERTON RULE
From the Pinkerton Brothers case, where there is only one actor, but two or more conspirators, all coconspirators are liable for the crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy as long as they are foreseeable.
Here, Carl did the selling of all the cocaine; therefore in this conspiracy there is only one actor. However Carl & D are coconspirators (see above); therefore D would be liable for any crime Carl commits in furtherance of the conspiracy. Since 20 people died who purchased the cocaine and deaths as a result of ingesting cocaine is foreseeable, the deaths are a foreseeable result of the conspiracy to sell cocaine; therefore both Carl and D would be liable for the deaths of the 20 people.
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
At common law (C/L) there is a principal in the first degree, principal in the second degree, accessories before the fact and accessories after the fact. At modern law, there is just a principal, an accomplice, and an accessory after the fact.
Under Common Law
Principal at C/L is present at the scene and the perpetrator of the crime.
Here, since Carl sold the cocaine, he would be the principal because he was at the scene, selling the cocaine.
An accessory before the fact is one who aids/abets the committing of the crime but is not present.
Here, since D is not present at the crime, but sold the cocaine to C for the purpose of distributing it, and without D's cocaine, C would not have been able to sell it, D is an accessory before the fact because she aided/abetted the commission of the crime.
18
?
Under Modern Law
Principal/Accomplice
At modern law the accomplice encompasses common law's principal in the 2nd degree and the accessory before the fact.
Here, Carl would be charged as a principal for the same reasons stated above, and D would be charged as an accomplice for the same reasons stated above.
HOMICIDE
A killing of one human by another.
Here, Victor (hereafter V) is dead; therefore there is a homicide.
ACTUAL CAUSATION
But for the Defendant's conduct, the Victim would still be alive.
Here, but for D's not calling for help, V would likely be saved. In conclusion, D is the actual cause of V's death.
PROXIMATE CAUSATION
Analysis of whether the death was a natural and probable result of the D's conduct or whether the death was a foreseeable result of the D's conduct.
Here, since D did not call for help, an unconscious victim of a plane crash died and since a death under these circumstances is foreseeable and the natural and probable result, Debra is the proximate cause of Victor's death.
LEGAL DUTY TO ACT
One has a legal duty to act where there is a contractual duty, a statutory duty, a relation (ie: parent/child), a creation of the peril, or a rendering of aid, and the D has the ability and the knowledge of the legal duty.
Here, D created the peril by crashing her plane; therefore she has a legal duty to act. Furthermore, Debra recognizes that V needs help and that he is unconscious; therefore she has the knowledge of the legal duty to act. Finally, Debra has the ability to act because it only requires a phone call to the authorities; therefore D only had to make a phone call.
In conclusion, since D had a legal duty to act, knew and had the ability, she should have acted and since she did not, she will be implicated in the death of Victor.
??MALICE
Malice can be expressed or implied.
19

EXPRESS MALICE
An outward manifestation of the intent to kill;
Here, no express malice.
IMPLIED MALICE
Can be shown by an intent to kill, intent to do serious bodily injury, a wanton/reckless disregard for a high risk of death, or Felony Murder.
Here, since D left V in a snowy mountainous region, unconscious as a result of the plane crash, and without a coat, D showed a reckless disregard for a high degree of risk of death, since V was unconscious and the authorities concluded that V needed help earlier.
In conclusion, there is implied malice.
COMMON LAW MURDER
Common law murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought.
Here, the death of V is not justified; therefore it is unlawful. Further, V is a human being. Finally, implied malice has been shown (above);
In conclusion, D is liable for the murder of V.
MURDER IN THE SECOND DEGREE
Murder in the 2nd degree is aka "abandoned & malignant heart murder" shown by intent to kill, intent to do serious bodily injury, or a wanton/reckless disregard for a high risk of death.
See implied malice above.
DEFENSES DEBRA MIGHT ASSERT
NECESSITY (see above)
FACTUAL IMPOSSIBILITY (see above)
?20

Question 3
Delia, who operates and is the only instructor at a successful dance school, needed a new dance instructor. While at an out-of-town social function, she mentioned the job opportunity to her friend, Fran, saying, "I know you don't have any formal dance training, but you are such a natural athlete that this position could be a good fit for you." Fran immediately quit her job and moved to the town of Delia's school to pursue her prospects as a dance instructor at the school.
Unaware that Fran was moving, Delia contacted Irv, an experienced dance instructor, to inquire about his availability for the position at her school. Delia offered Irv a six-month contract. Irv said, "That is a tempting offer. Can you give me a month to think about it?" Reluctantly, Delia signed a statement that provided that Irv had one month to make his decision based on the "good consideration" of $20 paid by Irv to Delia. In fact, Irv paid Delia nothing.
In the meantime, the landowner of the property at which the dance school operated terminated Delia's lease. Worried about having to find a new site on which to operate the dance school, Delia decided not to hire a second dance instructor just yet. At the end of the month, when Irv called Delia to advise her of his decision to accept the job offer, Delia advised him that she had decided not to hire another dance instructor.
1. Under what legal theory, if any, can Fran sue Delia, and to what relief, if any, might Fran be entitled? Discuss fully.
2. Is Irv likely to prevail in a lawsuit against Delia to enforce their contract? Discuss fully.
21

Fran v. Delia
Answer A to Question 3
?Fran will only be able to pursue a theory of breach of contract if she can prove that there was a valid contract as evidenced by mutual assent consisting of an offer, acceptance and consideration between Fran and Delia.
Does UCC or Common Law Apply?
The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) controls contracts for the sale of goods which are moveable items that are identifiable to the contract. Otherwise, common law controls.
Here, the proposed contract was for employment as a dance instructor, which is a service and is therefore not included in the UCC. Thus, the common law will control.
Was the Communication between Fran and Delia an Offer?
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent comprised of a promise to carry out the terms of the proposed transaction, which terms are definite, communicated to the offeree, thereby creating a power of acceptance in the offeree and which bargains for an act, a forbearance to act or a return promise. Under common law, for an offer to be definite enough it had to include quantity, time of performance, identity of the parties, price and subject matter. The Restatement will find the terms sufficient to support an offer if it is clear the parties intended to contract and there is a reasonable means to assess breach and damages.
Here, Fran will argue that Delia made a job offer to her because she mentioned the job opportunity at her dance school and indicated that, even though Fran had no formal training, she was such a natural athlete that the position would be a good fit for her.
Fran will argue that there was quantity - one job; parties - Delia and Fran, subject - dance instructor.
Fran will counter that there was no price since salary was not discussed, and time of performance was not satisfied because they did not discuss when Fran would be needed or for how long. She will also argue that even under the Restatement there are insufficient terms to determine whether a breach occurred
22
??
because they had no time when she was to begin and there is no appropriate measure of damages because no salary was discussed. Given the fact that Fran had no experience as a dance instructor, there is no reasonable basis to determine what a fair salary or payment would be.
Under common law, it does not appear that there were sufficient terms for an offer.
Acceptance
An acceptance is an unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Here, Fran will argue that she accepted the offer by quitting her job and moving to town to commence action. However, under common law, this is not sufficient for acceptance.
Unilateral Contract
A unilateral contract is one where the offeror does not seek a return promise but seeks performance by an action. The Offeror is prevented from revoking the offer for a reasonable period of time after the offeree has begun performance.
Here, Fran will attempt to argue that this was a unilateral contract that she accepted by commencing performance. However, this argument will fail because the offer was not sufficiently definite.
If there was a valid offer, did it lapse?
Offers are deemed to lapse and cannot be accepted after a reasonable time. Oral offers are usually deemed lapsed at the end of the conversation.
Here, even if the Court deemed the terms of the offer sufficiently definite, the offer would have lapsed at the end of their conversation and since Fran did not accept within a reasonable time, the offer could no longer be accepted.
Is Fran Entitled to Relief Under a Theory of Promissory Estoppel?
A promise which is not otherwise enforceable may be enforced in equity to avoid injustice if the Promisor made a promise upon which the offeree reasonably relied and such reliance caused her damages. The measure of damages is the reasonable value of her reliance on the promise.
Here, Fran will argue that Delia should be estopped from contending that there was no valid offer or acceptance because Frank reasonably relied on Delia's statements that she had 1) a job opportunity; 2) that Fran would be a good fit for.
23
????
Based on that promise, Fran reasonably quit her job and moved to the town where Delia had her dance study to pursue being a dance instructor.
Delia will argue that a reasonable person would not rely upon such a vague statement without further clarification and would require, at a bare minimum, some indication of how long she would be needed and how much she would be paid, especially given the fact that Fran has no professional experience or training as a dance instructor. It was unreasonable for Fran to simply quit her job and move without further discussions with Delia.
It is unlikely that the court will find that Fran reasonably relied upon a promise by Fran and she would not be entitled to damages under this theory.
Irv v. Delia
Contract, defined supra.
UCC or Common Law, defined supra.
Here, again, the offer involves a service contract and the common law will apply. Offer, defined supra.
Here, Delia manifested her intent to be bound to her offer to hire Irv, an experienced dance instructor, for six months. Although a specific salary was not discussed, the court could imply a salary similar to what Irv was currently earning in his position as a dance instructor and under the Restatement, it is likely that the court would find that the terms of this offer were sufficiently definite to constitute an offer, i.e., quantity - one dance teacher; time of performance - 6 months; parties: Delia and Irv, price - Irv's normal salary as a dance instructor; and subject matter: dance instruction.
Acceptance, defined supra.
Here, Irv did not accept the offer because he did not agree to the terms but requested one month to think it over.
Rejection:
A rejection is an indication that the party does not intend to enter into the contract.
Here, Irv did not reject the offer, but simply asked for a month to consider it. Therefore, there was no rejection.
24
?????
Option Contract
An option contract is a separate agreement to hold an original offer open for a certain period of time in exchange for consideration.
Here, Delia signed a statement indicating that she would hold the offer open for one month in exchange for Irv paying her $20. Delia will argue that this option contract was not supported by consideration because Irv did not in fact pay the $20 to her. However, courts have held that this is not a valid defense so long as there is a recital that valid consideration has been paid within the statement indicating that the offer will remain open.
Therefore, this is a valid option contract.
Statute of Frauds
Under common law, certain contracts must be in writing signed by the person to be charged to be enforced. These include contracts that cannot be completed in one year of the date of contract, those involving marriage, surety for the debts of others, executor's guarantees of payments and contracts involving land.
Since both the contract for employment and the option contract do not fall into any of these areas, the Statute of Frauds is not an issue. With respect to the Option Contract, since Delia did sign the contract, the statute would be satisfied.
Was Irv's Telephone Call a Valid Acceptance?
Acceptance, defined above.
Irv called Delia within the option period because he called at the end of the month. At that time, he advised her that he had decided to accept the job offer. Since it appears that this was unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer, this was a valid acceptance. Further, under an option contract the acceptance is valid as long as it is received by the Offeror prior to the termination date of the option contract. Because Irv called and advised Delia at the end of the month, prior to the option running, it was valid.
Was Delia's Revocation Valid?
A party can revoke an offer prior to acceptance unless there is a valid option contract and then the party cannot revoke until after the option period has lapsed.
25
????
Delia did not effectively revoke her offer for two reasons: 1) Irv had already accepted the offer because he had told her he accepted her job offer; and 2) the option period had not run and she was not entitled to revoke the offer.
Can Delia claim Impossibility?
A party to a contract will be freed from all obligations under the contract if, through no fault of their own, it has become impossible to perform.
Here, Delia will claim that the fact that her landlord had terminated her lease made it impossible for her to hire another dance instructor because she had no place for him to teach. She will argue that this was through no fault of her own because she did nothing to cause the termination and had no knowledge that the landlord intended to do so. However, this argument will fail because she was already looking for a new site for the school and clearly intended to continue operating the school.
Therefore, it is not impossible for her to perform.
Can Delia Claim Impracticability?
Some contracts will be discharged if it becomes sufficiently impracticable for them to perform. However, this involves substantial hardship usually involving at least ten times the cost of a contract as anticipated.
Here, the simple fact that Delia is having to move her studio is insufficient to support that it is too impractical to hire Irv since she plans to continue to operate a dance school given the fact that she was looking for a new studio.
Can Delia Claim Duress?
A contract entered into due to duress will not be enforced if the duress is sufficient that it would overcome the will of a reasonably firm person.
Here, Delia will argue that she did not want to enter into the option contract and did so reluctantly. However, there is no indication that Irv put any pressure on her; he simply asked her for a month to think the offer over. There is no evidence to suggest conduct that would overcome the will of a reasonably firm person.
???This defense is unlikely to succeed.
26

Breach:
A breach is an unexcused failure to perform a duty which gives rise to damages. A minor breach is one wherein the non-breaching party is given a substantial benefit of his bargain and does not excuse his continued performance but requires that the breaching party pay damages for the breach. A major breach involves the essence of the bargain and the non-breaching party is entitled to stop performance and sue immediately for damages.
If Delia refuses to perform by allowing Irv to begin work as a dance instructor, this would be a major breach and Irv would be entitled to stop performance and sue for damages.
Anticipatory Repudiation:
An anticipatory repudiation is a clear expression that a party does not intend to perform under the terms of the contract. The non-breaching party is relieved from all further duties under the contract and may immediately bring a suit for damages.
Here, Delia clearly advised Irv that she did not intend to perform under the contract because she told him she had decided not to hire another dance instructor. So unless Delia immediately repudiates that statement, she has committed an anticipatory repudiation.
Damages;
Irv is entitled to his compensatory damages which would consist of six months salary at his normal rate.
Mitigation:
A non-breaching party is not entitled to recover for damages that he could reasonably avoid.
If Irv is able to find another job as a dance instructor, Delia would be entitled to an offset for any earnings he had during those six months.
????27

3)
Answer B to Question 3
Does UCC or common law rule in this transaction?
Since UCC rules in contracts for goods, and common law in all other contracts, and this contract deals with employment services, not goods, common law will rule this transaction.
Did Delia make a valid offer to Fran?
Offer is an assertion of present intent to be bound by clear and specific terms.
In this case, Fran and Delia were in a social situation, so a reasonable person would probably have not concluded that this was a formal offer. Under the objective theory of contracts, the parties are bound to the interpretation given by a reasonable person. Also Delia said that the position "could be a good fit" for Fran; that does not seem like a serious or definite offer.
Therefore, there are no reasons to believe that an offer was made because Delia was only making a general comment that should have not been construed as an offer.
Can Fran recover under a promissory estoppel doctrine?
If the defendant makes a promise to another, wherein the promise is foreseeable that induces reliance in the other person, and the other person in fact relies on the promise to his detriment, the defendant will be liable for reliance damages.
Here, we see clearly that Fran relied on Delia's comments. However, it seems that Delia did not expect Fran to rely on her statement. This was a social situation; maybe Fran could work towards becoming an instructor since she did not have any formal training, but it does not seem like an employment offer as discussed herein above.
Therefore, Fran will not likely be able to recover from Delia under promissory estoppel since a reasonable person would have not believed that he was inducing reliance on Fran.
What relief can Fran expect?
As previously discussed, we do not believe that Fran will be entitled to relief for
28

anticipatory repudiation. However, if the court decided that the reliance was foreseeable, she could be entitled to recover for her expenses and the loss of her job. The court would try to put Fran in the same situation as she was before the promise.
Did Delia make Irv an offer?
Offer, see supra.
Clearly Delia made an offer, since she put it in writing that she would give Irv one month to make his decision.
Is the offer revocable?
When an offeror receives consideration to keep an offer open, an option contract is created wherein the offer is irrevocable for the amount of time stipulated.
Here we have a signed writing that creates an option contract because Irv offered the consideration of $20 to keep the offer open for a month. Even though the consideration was not paid, this does not make the options contract invalid. Delia will be able to recover the $20, but she will not be able to revoke her offer. Delia tried to revoke her offer, but she did not have a right to do so because it was the end of the time stipulated in the options contract.
Therefore, the offer is irrevocable because there was a valid Options contract.
Is there a valid acceptance?
Acceptance is the unconditional assent to the terms in the offer. Here Irv called to advise Delia of his "decision to accept."
Since he Irv still had the power of acceptance because of his Options contract, the acceptance is valid.
Is there a valid contract?
To form a contract, it is required to have an offer, acceptance and consideration. Consideration is what is bargained for by the parties.
Here we have consideration because it is an employment contract, services for pay.
29

Since we have valid offer and acceptance, as discussed herein above, plus mutual consideration, we have a valid contract.

Did Delia perform an anticipatory repudiation?
If a party asserts that she will not fulfill her duties in the future before performance is due, it is said that he has committed anticipatory repudiation and will be liable for breach of contract.
Here we have a valid contract, but Delia told Irv that she had decided "not to hire another dance instructor."
Since Delia reneged on the contract, we have anticipatory repudiation and she will be liable for breach of contract.
Can Delia use the defense of impracticability?
If the occurrence of an event, whose non-occurrence was a basic assumption during contract formation, makes delivery unduly hard, and the party does not bear the risk for this kind of event, then the contract will be discharged for impracticability.
The event here is that Delia's lease was terminated, but this is an event that Delia should have forecasted as a business owner; therefore she bears the risk because she knew about her lease situation.
Since Delia bore the risk of the lease being terminated, she won't be able to use the defense of impracticability.
Can Delia use the defense of impossibility?
If events after the formation of the contract make delivery impossible, the contract will be discharged.
Here, performance is not impossible because Delia can find another place for her school, so impossibility will not work as a defense either.
Can Delia use the defense of frustration of purpose?
If an event, whose non-occurrence was a basic assumption, occurs after formation and destroys the purpose for which a party entered into the contract, then the contract will be discharged for frustration of purpose.
Again, Delia is the one responsible for managing her lease and bears the risk. Also, she still has the purpose to continue with the school in another location.
30

Therefore frustration of purpose will not work as a defense since the school will be operating in another location and Irv can work as an instructor there.
Can Delia use the Statute of Frauds to avoid contract enforcement?
The Statute of Frauds requires that some contracts must be in writing and signed by the party to be charged. However, an employment contract like this will be enforceable even though the contract was oral. It could even be considered that the offer was in writing with the Operations contract, but facts do not clearly indicate if just the option contract was in writing or both offer and options contract were in writing.
What damages will Irv recover?
Expectation damages will be awarded to give the non-breaching party the benefit of the bargain. Specific performance may be imposed by the court when damages are not adequate and it is easy to enforce the delivery of performance.
In our case, it is not likely that the court will impose specific performance because it is very hard to implement in employment contracts. Irv would likely get compensation damages for the salary he could have made, plus other incidental and consequential expenses that he may have had. He has the duty to mitigate and find similar employment, and then the damages will be discounted by the amount mitigated.
Therefore, Irv will be entitled to recover for salary expected to be received and other related damages as consequence of the breach, but he must mitigate by searching for similar employment.
31

Question 4
Eight-year-old Hannah attended Camp, a children's summer camp. Some of the children at Camp were resident campers who spent each night in cabins, and others, such as Hannah, were day campers who attended Camp between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and rode bicycles to and from their nearby suburban homes daily. The bicycles were locked outside each day camper's cabin, with the camper keeping the key to the bicycle.
Rick, a Camp counselor, owned a baseball autographed by Babe Ruth that he had brought with him to Camp to show the campers. One day at 3:00 p.m. after a baseball game at Camp, Rick discovered that his autographed baseball had been put into the ball bag and used in the game. He was very upset to find that Babe Ruth's autograph had been all but worn off as a result.
Rick learned that Hannah had been seen coming out of Rick's cabin a few minutes before the baseball game and that she had sat near the ball bag before the start of the game. He told Hannah that he would not let her ride home until she admitted what she had done. Very upset, Hannah continually protested her innocence until Rick finally told her at 6:30 p.m. that she could get her bike and ride home. She lived approximately one-half mile from Camp.
When Hannah's parents asked the Camp Director why their daughter had been so late in getting home, the Director told them what had happened. The Director added that he would never have allowed Rick to keep Hannah so late had he been aware of it. He also told Hannah's parents that Hannah had not taken Rick's ball. In fact, her eight-year-old campmate, Jessie, confessed that she had placed Rick's autographed baseball in the ball bag.
1. On what theory or theories, if any, might an action be brought on Hannah's behalf against Rick, what defenses might Rick assert, and what is the likely outcome? Discuss fully.
2. On what theory or theories, if any, might an action be brought on Hannah's behalf against Camp, what defense might Camp assert, and what is the likely outcome? Discuss fully.
32

Hannah v Rick
False Imprisonment?
Answer A to Question 4
A false imprisonment is an intentional confinement of a defendant to a bound area. Rick kept Hannah from leaving camp at her regular 4pm end time. He kept her until 6:30pm, which is a very long time considering Hannah is only 8 and her parents did not know where she was and would be worried she got hurt riding her bike home. It is unclear to what area Hannah was bound but Rick certainly asserted his authority intentionally to prevent Hannah from leaving because he wanted Hannah to confess to taking his Babe Ruth ball. Hannah continued to protest, showing she was forced to stay somewhere, which shows she was confined. Damages are presumed for intentional torts. Rick is guilty of false imprisonment.
Intentional Infliction of Severe Emotional Distress (IIED)?
IIED exists where a plaintiff intentionally causes severe emotional distress through extreme and outrageous conduct. Hannah was very upset from Rick's conduct, but this would not suffice for a IIED because of more severe emotional distress required than being very upset.
Negligence?
If Hannah can show a duty was owed by Rick, he breached that duty, which was the actual and proximate cause of damages, then she will prevail on negligence.
Duty?
One generally owes a duty of reasonable care to prevent harm to others. A special relationship may exist when one has control over another. Rick was the counselor at Hannah's camp, thus owed a heightened duty to prevent risk of harm to Hannah.
Breach?
Breach is established when the burden of preventing the harm considering the utility of the conduct is less than the probability of harm times the magnitude of the harm (Hand Formula). Rick's burden of calling the parents, having the conversation the next day at camp, or other alternatives to holding her over the end of the day are very slight. The probability of an 8 year old being harmed
33

when forced to stay at camp accused of stealing, then riding home late in the day on a bike for .5 miles after a long day would be great and the type of harm could be great if she was injured on her bike. Here, given Rick owed a special duty, he breached his duty to Hannah.
Actual Cause?
But for the act of holding Hannah over, she would not have been very upset and suffered from the incident. Rick's actions were both the but-for cause and a substantial factor.
Proximate Cause?
There are no superseding or intervening acts to discuss.
Damages?
The only damages appear to be emotionally being upset and Hannah's suffering.
Defenses?
The comparative and contributory negligence of Hannah does not apply.
Defamation?
Defamation is a defamatory statement made of and about the plaintiff which caused harm.
Defamatory Statement?
Rick accused Hannah of stealing without sufficient facts to prove the statement was true. Since both parties are private and this didn't concern a public matter, there is no malice or negligence requirement and falsity is presumed. The falseness was also later shown when Jessie confessed. Rick should have done more investigation before accusing Hannah because he based his accusation on the fact Hannah had been coming out of his cabin and near the ball bag. Here, the statement was of and about Hannah and defamatory.
Published?
It is not clear if this statement was published, but possibly others overheard Rick's accusations due to his negligence in having loud conversations. Since a statement that Hannah steals is a crime, the slanderous statement would have presumed damages.
Here, Rick will be liable for defamation for any negligent publishing that Hannah had stolen the ball. Since Rick believed the statement was true, he can defend that he based his accusation of overhearing Hannah had been in his tent and near the ball bag.
34

False Light?
A false light claim exists when the defendant portrays the plaintiff in a false way that a reasonable person would offend to. Rick may have communicated to others that Hannah steals and a reasonable person would object to being seen in this light because no one wants to be seen as a criminal. The statement turned out to be false, so here, a claim for false light exists.
Defenses
Defense of property?
Rick may defend that the ball was his property and his acts towards Hannah were to protect his property. However, since Rick was not in hot pursuit and did not have enough support for his accusations, he was not privileged to use force.
Contributory Negligence?
One generally owes a duty to prevent harm to themselves for risks created by others' conduct. D will defend O was contributorily negligent to completely prevent recovery unless D had the last clear chance. The standard for children is evaluated giving weight to what the average child of the age, education, and experience would do. Hannah was not contributorily negligent because she continually protested to go home and acted to prevent any further harm to herself.
Comparative Negligence?
Generally, when a claim for damages is found under negligence, but the plaintiff was partially at fault, comparative jurisdictions will reduce the damages by the amount the plaintiff was at fault in a pure jurisdiction, and only award the reduced damages if the plaintiff's fault was less than 50% in partial jurisdictions. As discussed above, Hannah was not comparatively negligent because she continually protested to go home and acted to prevent any further harm to herself.
Privilege?
Rick may assert he was privileged to accuse Hannah to prevent others from being victims as a defense to defamation and false light. However, since his claims were unfounded and an eight year old is unlikely to present a danger of theft to others, this defense will fail.
Hannah v Camp
Because Rick is an employee of the Camp, the Camp will be vicariously liable for Rick's act in the scope of his employment under respondeat superior. However, the camp is not responsible for Rick's intentional torts. The director of the camp
35

told the parents he would never have allowed Rick to keep Hannah and had he known so this was not interference of the scope of employment. Because Rick's false imprisonment was intentional, Camp will not be liable for his actions, but could be vicariously liable for his negligence.
Negligent hiring?
If Hannah can show Camp was negligent in their hiring of Rick, she may prevail. This action will depend on what level of investigation the Camp performed on counselors. If the camp knew or had reason to know of Rick's tendencies to make quick accusations and give very harsh punishments without regard to the fact the campers are only 8 years old, they may have breached a duty owed to Hannah, which was the actual and proximate cause of her injuries.
36

(3) HvR
Answer B to Question 4
A. False Imprisonment - is the act of causing the plaintiff to be confined or restrained in a bounded area without consent or privilege.
1.) The act must be voluntary, not involuntary, and we are given no facts that suggest that R suffers from epileptic seizures or the like. Here, R, presumably an adult, under color of authority "told" Hannah she couldn't go home unless she "admitted" her wrongdoing.
2.) Confined or restrained - R's words that he "would not let her" go home imply that H did not feel she could leave. H does not have an adult's capacity to leave anyway. She is taught that she is under the authority of her teacher, parent or camp counselor. Therefore, H may think she cannot leave. It is not important whether H is confined or restrained but that she believes she is (a reasonable belief).
3.) bounded area - If the camp is far from anywhere in a forest of trees, H could be deemed in a bounded area. Negating this element is that H is obviously expected to be able to ride home every evening, only a half mile. Therefore, this element may not be proven. Arguably, H's age may cause her to believe she is in a bounded area.
(4) Defenses
A.) Consent - implied or express
R could argue that H consented to stay even though she knew how
and where to ride home. Negating this defense is H's age. She is unable to consent.
B.) Assumption of the Risk - does not appear to apply because H assumed no risk in a dangerous way.
C.) Privilege - R can argue he was privileged as camp counselor, much as a schoolteacher, to discipline a camper who was misbehaving. This privilege will likely be
effective because if R had a reasonable belief that H had the baseball, this is permissible, even if mistaken.
He can only detain her for a reasonable time in a reasonable manner. If this is summer camp, at 6:30pm, it is still light and H had time to go home. No facts are given to suggest R confined H in an unreasonable manner.
R will not be liable for False Imprisonment. However, if he is liable, damages are presumed.
B.) Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress (IIED) - R's conduct must be extreme and outrageous causing severe emotional harm.
Here, nothing in R's conduct would rise to the level of extreme and outrageous conduct. He simply detained H until he realized that H was innocent.
Here, however, reckless conduct can satisfy IIED. If a jury believes it was reckless of R to keep H so late, clearly she rode home alone at 6:30pm, H may
37
????????
collect damages if she had either physical or other symptoms, such as headache.
Physical harm is no longer required. C.) Negligent IED
Although founded in negligence, this could arise from an intentional tort such as false imprisonment.
?intentional.
R's conduct doesn't appear to be negligent, however, but
He intentionally kept her at camp; there was no negligence
involved.
D.) Assault - is the act of causing immediate apprehension of harmful or
offensive touching.
Here, if H was apprehensive that R might strike her or physically
restrain her, this tort could be proven. Under the doctrine of transferred intent, if R is liable for either Assault or False Imprisonment, the intent can transfer to the other tort.
Again, damages are presumed.
II. HvC
A.) False Imprisonment - Although an employer is generally not
responsible for the intentional acts of its employees, there are exceptions:
1.) Past Conduct - If C knew that R had a habit of prior conduct of accusing young children of stealing, and false imprisonment, etc. C can be liable under a theory of respondeat superior. This means that an agency relationship
exists between R and C. Here, R is C's agent as camp counselor.
Generally, however, an employer is not liable unless R had
exhibited prior conduct of a bad nature.
2.) Course and Scope of Duties -
Here, we are told by C that C does not allow children to be kept at camp so late. If C has conveyed this to its counselors and R disregarded this instruction, R has exceeded the course and scope of his duties. Unfortunately, this is probably a difficult defense for C as C would be responsible for this agency relationship. If it is held R exceeded the scope of his duties, C would be liable.
B.) Negligent Hiring -
If C did not exercise reasonable care (a higher degree of reasonable care for an employer) in searching R's background, criminal record and other facts C could be liable to H.
If R had other facts in his background that were known to C that precluded R from working with children, C will be liable to H.
Most likely, C will be liable to H for a tort.
38
????



??California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2007
?1

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
OCTOBER 2007 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2007 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page 3.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Torts 4 
Criminal Law 16 
Contracts 23
???Torts 32
2

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?3

Question 1
Child, a four-year-old, was seated in a shopping cart her mother was using to shop at Market. While mother was distracted with her shopping list, Child took a banana from a display counter and took a bite out if it, peel and all. Child swallowed the bite she had taken and threw the remainder of the banana onto the floor. Eventually, Child became very ill from a toxic substance the banana supplier had sprayed the banana skin with before delivery of the bananas to Market.
Shopper slipped on the banana that Child had thrown onto the floor and fell against the shopping cart he was using. As he fell, he hit his face on a sharp edge protruding from the shopping cart, severely injuring his eye.
Polly, a police officer, who was off duty and doing her personal shopping, saw Shopper fall and ran to his aid. Polly slipped on the banana that child had thrown onto the floor and, as Polly fell, she came in contact with the sharp edge of the same shopping cart that Shopper had used. Polly's arm was seriously cut as a result.
Child, through her mother as guardian ad litem, Shopper, and Polly filed separate lawsuits against Market. Child claims that Market is strictly liable for injuries caused by the toxic substance on the banana peel; Shopper and Polly each claim that Market is strictly liable for the injuries caused by the sharp edge on the shopping cart.
What defenses might Market reasonably raise to each claim, and what is the likely outcome of:
1. Child's lawsuit against Market? Discuss.
2. Shopper's lawsuit against Market? Discuss. 3. Polly's lawsuit against Market? Discuss.
4

Child v. Market
Answer A to Question 1
?Strict Products Liability for injuries caused by banana peel
To establish strict product liability, D must owe an absolute duty to prevent a foreseeable harm to P, D must breach that duty by providing a defective product, and P's damages must be actually and proximately caused by D's defective product.
D owes an absolute duty to prevent a foreseeable harm to P if D is a commercial supplier of the product. Privity is not required, only that P is a foreseeable user of the product. In this case, Market is a retailer of the bananas and is thus a commercial supplier of the bananas, and a child within its store makes the child a foreseeable user of the product. Thus Market owes an absolute duty to prevent a foreseeable harm to Child.
Breach of duty is established when the product is defective. A manufacturing defect occurs when a product's safety falls below the ordinary expectations of an average consumer. In this case, Child would argue that having a toxic substance on the banana skin falls below the standards of ordinary expectations of an average consumer. One would expect a banana skin, which is held in one's hand while the insides of the banana is being consumed, to be free of toxic substances capable of making one very ill. Market would argue that a toxic substance on banana skins does not fall below the standards of ordinary expectations of an average consumer. Fruits are often sprayed with chemicals and insecticides, and people generally know to wash the fruit before eating. However, eating unwashed fruit generally wouldn't make an individual very ill, particularly not after just one bite as in this case, and thus the manufacturing defect of a toxic substance on a banana peel would fall below the standards of ordinary expectations of an average consumer. Market has breached his absolute duty to Child.
P's injuries must be both actually and proximately caused by D's breach of duty. Actual cause is established when P's injuries would not have occurred but for the defect. Actual cause here is established, for Child would not have been ill but for the toxic substance. Proximate cause requires that the harm be foreseeable, or if there was an intervening force, that the result of the intervening force be foreseeable. In this case Market would argue that the harm was not foreseeable, for people do not normally eat the banana peel. Child would argue that it is foreseeable that someone could decide to eat the peel of a banana, perhaps out of curiosity, or someone who has never eaten a banana before. Thus the harm caused to Child is foreseeable, and proximate cause is established.
?5

P must suffer damages to recover in strict products liability. In this case, damages occurred when child became very ill after eating the banana peel.
Defenses
Known contributory negligence. In strict liability, P's recoveries may be barred if P knew of the dangers associated with the product, and yet acted in a negligent manner that was below the standard of care set to protect P. Market would argue that P knew that eating a banana peel was not something people usually do, and can be assumed that eating the peel may pose dangerous, and thus eating the peel can be considered a known negligent act. Child would argue that he was only four years old, and thus did not know of the potential dangers associated with eating a banana peel. Most likely, a four year old would not understand the dangers of eating a banana peel, and thus Market's defense of known contributory negligence would probably fail.
Market could also argue that Child's mother was knowingly contributorily negligent because she should have watched Child to make sure Child did not act in a dangerous manner. Mother was distracted with her shopping list and did not watch child, but mother should have known of the dangers that could occur from not watching Child. Child would argue that mother cannot possibly watch Child at every single moment within the store, and thus was not knowingly contributorily negligent. It is true that a mother cannot have her eye on Child all the time, and so Market would probably lose on this defense.
In comparative negligence states, fault between P and Market would be apportioned and distributed accordingly. Any negligence child may have conducted for eating the peel will be deducted from her award of damages.
Shopper v. Market
Strict liability for injuries caused by shopping cart
To establish strict product liability, D must owe an absolute duty to prevent a foreseeable harm to P, D must breach that duty by providing a defective product, and P's damages must be actually and proximately caused by D's defective product.
D owes an absolute duty to prevent a foreseeable harm to P if D is a commercial supplier of the product. Privity is not required, only that P is a foreseeable user of the product. Market would argue that he is not a commercial supplier of the shopping cart, for it only provides shopping carts for shoppers to use while in the store. Market probably isn't a commercial supplier of the product, and thus probably does not owe an absolute duty to Shopper. Shopper would have to bring negligence to recover.
???6

Breach of duty is established when the product is defective. A manufacturing defect occurs when a product's safety falls below the ordinary expectations of an average consumer. Assuming arguendo that Market is a commercial supplier of the shopping cart, Market would argue that a sharp edge protruding from a shopping cart does not fall below the ordinary expectations of an average consumer. A shopping cart is made of metal, and it would not be unreasonable to expect it from having sharp edges. Shopper would argue that having a sharp edge protruding from the cart falls below ordinary expectations. A sharp edge protruding from a cart probably falls below ordinary expectations, for sharp protruding metal objects are typically considered dangerous and expected to not be present, particularly in a grocery store with lots of people present.
P's injuries must be both actual and proximately caused by D's breach of duty. Actual cause is established when P's injuries would not have occurred but for the defect. In this case there were two independent concurrent causes that caused an indivisible injury to P. Both causes are still but for causation of P's injuries. In this case, actual cause is established, for even though Child's actions caused Shopper to slip, Shopper would not incur an eye injury but for the sharp edge protruding from the shopping cart. Proximate cause requires that the harm be foreseeable, or if there is an intervening force, that the result of the intervening force be foreseeable. In this case, Market would argue Shopper's injury was unforeseeable, for slipping on the floor and then having your eye meet an edge of the shopping cart is unlikely. Shopper would argue that it is very foreseeable that food items will be spilled onto the ground of a grocery store, and that shoppers can potentially slip on the ground and subsequently injure themselves on the shopping carts. Shopper makes a more compelling argument, for food items are regularly spilled on the ground.
P must suffer damages to recover in strict products liability. Shopper suffered a severe eye injury.
Defenses
Known contributory negligence. In strict liability, P's recoveries may be barred if P knew of the dangers associated with the product, and yet acted in a negligent manner that was below the standard of care set to protect P. Shopper did not act in a negligent manner knowing of the dangers associated with the product. Shopper did not know there was a sharp protruding edge from the shopping cart.
Comparative negligence - In comparative negligence states, fault between P and Market would be apportioned and distributed accordingly. Fault of shopper for negligently not watching where he was going could possibly be deducted from his award of damages.
?7

Polly v. Market
Strict liability for injuries caused by shopping cart
To establish strict product liability, D must owe an absolute duty to prevent a foreseeable harm to P, D must breach that duty by providing a defective product, and P's damages must be actually and proximately caused by D's defective product.
Duty - see Shopper v. Market
Breach - see Shopper v. Market
Causation - see Shopper v. Market
Damages - Polly suffered a cut on her arm.
Defenses
A rescuer cannot be found contributorily negligent, nor can he be found to have assumed the risk. No defenses available for Market.
??????8

Products Liability
Answer B to Question 1
CHILD V. MARKET
??A manufacturer or distributor of goods who places into the stream of commerce a product which is defective will be held liable for the harm resulting from the use of the defective product.
Privity
Under a leading case McPherson v. Buick, privity is not required. Therefore, Child may assert a claim against Market even though she did not purchase the banana.
Thus, Child's lack of privity does not bar the claim. Defect - Design
Here, Child will contend that the product was defective in design because the toxic substance was intentionally applied to the banana. Therefore, the banana was made as intended. However, Market will assert that the cost of not using the toxic substance would not outweigh the cost of damage to the banana crop.
Therefore, the court will probably not find a design defect because the alternative design is not cost effective.
Defect - Manufacturing
Here, the product was impliedly made as intended. Therefore, there can be no defect in manufacturing.
Defect - Warning
The facts do not indicate that Market warned of the use of the toxic substance on the banana. Therefore, Child will argue that Market's failure to warn of the use of the toxic substance made the product defective in warning.
The court will probably find the banana to be defective in warning.
Strict Liability in Tort
A manufacturer or distributor of goods who places into the stream of commerce a product which is defective and abnormally dangerous, will be held strictly liable for the harm resulting from the use of the defective product.
?????9

Distributor
Here, Market is in the business of selling products such as the banana to the public and is thus a distributor.
Stream of Commerce
Here, Market's selling of the banana to the public in a public store constitutes a placing of the product into the stream of commerce.
Defective
As discussed supra, the banana was not defective in design because the cost of the alternative design outweighs the risk of harm. However, as discussed supra, the banana was defective in warning because the banana did not contain any warnings of the use of the toxic chemicals on the banana.
Thus, the product was defective in warning. Abnormally Dangerous
Here, Child will argue that Market's failure to warn of the use of toxic chemicals, which were sprayed onto the banana by the supplier before delivery, caused the product to exceed the reasonable expectation of a consumer. Furthermore, Child became very ill because of her ingestion of the toxic substance on the banana.
Therefore, the court is likely to find that the product was abnormally dangerous due to the defect in warning.
Actual Causation
Market will argue that even if they applied a warning, it is unlikely that Child would be able to read it or change her actions because of the warning. However, Child will contend that but for the defendant's failing to place adequate warning on the banana, her mother would have paid more attention and possibly prevented her from consuming the banana.
Therefore, if the court finds actual causation, they will proceed to proximate causation.
Proximate Causation
Here, Child will argue that because there were no intervening causes of harm, Child's harm was directly caused by Market's failure to warn, thus making Child's injuries foreseeable. However, Market will contend that the eating of the entire
??????10

banana, "peel and all," was not a foreseeable use of the product. However, Child will argue that someone who did not know the customary way of eating bananas might attempt to eat the entire banana; thus the use is foreseeable.
Thus, the court will probably find actual and proximate causation. Damages
Here, the Child became very ill as a result of her ingestion of the toxic substance. These damages will constitute general damages consisting of the plaintiff's general pain and suffering. Child may also have suffered special damages in medical bills.
Therefore, Child will probably be able to recover from Market on a strict liability in tort action absent a defense.
Defense - Assumption of the Risk
Plaintiff will be barred from recovery for negligence if it can be shown that the plaintiff voluntarily encountered a known risk.
Here, Market will contend that Child assumed the risk by eating the banana peel which is not normally consumed by consumers. However, Child will contend that because she is only four, and because no facts indicate that child knew of the toxic substance, that she did not in fact, nor have the capability of assuming the risk of toxic substance on bananas.
Therefore, this defense will fail due to the fact that Child did not know of the risk or voluntarily encounter it.
Defense - Misuse of Product
Market will contend that the eating of the entire banana, "peel and all," was not a foreseeable use of the product. However, Child will argue that someone who did not know of the customary way of eating bananas might attempt to eat the entire banana; thus the use is foreseeable.
Thus, if the court finds that the use was foreseeable, misuse of product will probably not suffice for a valid defense.
SHOPPER V. MARKET Strict Liability in Tort - Shopping Cart
Defined supra.
?????11

Here, Market does not deal with the sale of the shopping carts and is thus not a distributor. Furthermore, the facts do not indicate that Market manufactured the carts. Therefore, Market is not a manufacturer.
Therefore, because there is no liability for non-merchant or non-manufacturer defendant in a products liability claim, Shopper will not succeed in an action for products liability against Market.
Strict Liability - Restatement 2nd
One who maintains an abnormally dangerous condition or activity on his property, or engages in an activity which involves a high risk of harm will be held strictly liable for the harm resulting from said dangerous condition or activity even though due care was taken to prevent the harm which occurred.
Here, Shopper will argue that the use of the shopping cart was an abnormally dangerous activity because of the sharp edge protruding from the shopping cart. Furthermore, Shopper will assert that the presence of the shopping cart with the protruding edge constituted a dangerous condition.
Furthermore, Shopper will argue that Market's maintaining of the dangerous condition and activity gave rise to their liability. However, Market will contend that because owners of land are not normally held strictly liable for damages on their land, Market should not be held strictly liable.
Actual Causation
But for defendant's maintaining of said dangerous condition and activity, Shopper would not have injured his eye when he slipped on the banana peel.
Proximate Causation
Market will contend that the banana peel was an intervening cause of harm making Shopper's injuries an indirect result of Market's maintaining of said dangerous conditions. However, Shopper will assert that it is foreseeable that someone would injure their body on the cart, thus making the result foreseeable.
If the court finds actual and proximate causation, it will move to damages. Damages
Here, Shopper severely injured his eye. Therefore, Shopper suffered general damages consisting of his general pain and suffering. Shopper may have also suffered damages consisting of his medical bills and lost wages.
????12

If the court finds that Market can be held strictly liable for the dangerous conditions on the land, the court will probably find the defendant liable for the injuries sustained by Shopper absent any applicable defenses.
Defense - Assumption of Risk
Defined supra.
Here, Market will assert that Shopper assumed the risk that there would be slippery surfaces on the floor. However, no facts indicate that Shopper actually knew of the banana's presence. Thus, Shopper will argue that he did not know of the risk and that, consequently, he did not assume the risk.
This defense will probably not relieve liability. POLLY V. MARKET
Strict Liability in Tort - Shopping Cart
Defined supra.
Here, Market does not deal with the sale of the shopping carts and is thus not a distributor. Furthermore, the facts do not indicate that Market manufactured the carts. Therefore, Market is not a manufacturer.
Therefore, because there is no liability for non-merchant or non-manufactureer defendants in a products liability claim, Shopper will not succeed in an action for products liability against Market.
Strict Liability - Restatement 2nd
One who maintains an abnormally dangerous condition or activity on his property, or who engages in an activity which involves a high risk of harm will be held strictly liable for the harm resulting from said dangerous condition or activity even though due care was taken to prevent the harm which occurred.
Here, Polly will argue that the use of the shopping cart was an abnormally dangerous activity because of the sharp edge protruding from the shopping cart. Furthermore, Polly will assert that the presence of the shopping cart with the protruding edge constituted a dangerous condition.
Furthermore, Polly will argue that Market's maintaining of the dangerous condition and activity gave rise to their liability. However, Market will contend that because owners of land are not normally held strictly liable for dangers on their land, Market should not be held strictly liable.
????13

Actual Causation
But for defendant's maintaining of said dangerous condition and activity, Shopper would not have injured his eye when he slipped on the banana peel.
Proximate Causation
Market will contend that the banana peel was an intervening cause of harm making Shopper's injuries an indirect result of Market's maintaining of said dangerous conditions. However, Polly will assert that it is foreseeable that someone would injure their body on the cart, thus making the result foreseeable.
If the court finds actual and proximate causation, it will move to damages. Damages
Here, Polly's arm was seriously cut as a result of her fall. Therefore, Polly suffered general damages consisting of her general pain and suffering. Polly may have also suffered special damages consisting of her medical bills and lost wages.
If the court finds that market can be held strictly liable for the dangerous conditions on the land, the court probably finds the defendant liable for the injuries sustained by Shopper absent any applicable defenses.
Defense - Assumption of Risk Defined supra.
Here, Market will assert that Polly assumed the risk of the banana because she had just seen Shopper slip on it. Thus, Market will argue that Polly's action demonstrated an assumption of the risk. However, no facts indicate that Polly actually knew of the banana's presence. Thus, Polly will argue that she did not know of the risk and that, consequently, she did not assume the risk.
However, Polly will contend that because she was a rescuer, her actions were involuntary from a legal perspective. Thus, Polly will assert that assumption of the risk is inapplicable.
The court will most likely not apply assumption of the risk because Polly was a rescuer.
Defense - Firefighters Rule
Where a public servant such as a firefighter or police officer, in the course of his duties, is exposed to a danger that would be inherent in his course of work, the
?????14

public servant will generally be barred from recovery for harm resulting from danger inherent in his line of work.
Here, Polly was a police officer. Thus, Market will contend that under the Firefighters Rule, she is barred from recovery for her injuries incurred while rescuing someone. However, the facts indicate that Polly was off duty and doing her personal shopping. Therefore, this rule is inapplicable because Polly's harm did not occur during the course and scope of her work.
Defense will probably not apply.
15

Question 2
Twelve-year-old Al was throwing rocks against a tree alongside the road to amuse himself while waiting for his school bus. One of the rocks thrown by Al missed the tree and shattered the windshield of an approaching car driven by Bill.
Bill, who had just left a bank he had robbed, was driving carefully and below the speed limit to avoid attracting the attention of the police. When the windshield shattered, Bill swerved, causing the car to run off the road. The car struck and killed Vic, a boy who had also been waiting for the school bus.
Chuck and Dave, Vic's brothers, decided that the accident had been Al's fault and, together, carefully planned to avenge Vic's death. They pooled their money and bought a shotgun, planning to use it to shoot Al. When the time came to go to looking for Al, however, Chuck told Dave, "I'm not going. If you want to do it, you're on your own." Dave carried out the plan, shooting and killing Al. After killing Al, Dave removed Al's watch and kept it for himself.
1. Did Al commit any crime relating to the death of Vic? Discuss.
2. Could Bill be found guilty of any crime relating to the death of Vic? Discuss.
3. Did either Chuck or Dave, or both, commit: a. Conspiracy to murder Al? Discuss.
b. Murder of Al? Discuss.
c. Theft of Al's watch? Discuss.
16

Answer A to Question 2
1. Al's crimes in relation to death of Vic
Battery - A battery is committed if an intentional unlawful application of force is applied to another person. Here Al is throwing rocks but one of his rocks accidentally hit a tree, bounced off and shattered Bill's windshield, causing Bill to swerve and hit and kill Vic.
Al would not be liable for battery.
Involuntary Manslaughter - A person would be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter if he acts by committing a misdemeanour or by acts of criminal recklessness, which result in the death of another.
There are no facts to show that Al acted with criminal recklessness as he was only throwing rocks against a tree.
Al would not be held liable in the death of Vic.
2. Bill's commission of a crime relating to death of Vic
Homicide - killing of another human being with malice Malice is measured in one of four ways:
1. intenttokill;
2. intenttocauseseriousbodilyinjury;
3. wantonandwillfuldisregardforhumanlife;or
4. duringthecommissionofaninherentlydangerousfelony.
Intent to kill is not shown from the facts.
Intent to cause serious bodily injury is also not shown from the facts.
Willful and wanton disregard is not shown here because Bill was driving very carefully.
Felony murder can be established if a murder occurs during the perpetration of an inherently dangerous felony. The felony continues until a zone of safety is reached. Here from the facts Bill had just completed a bank robbery (an inherently dangerous felony) and although he had left the scene, he was driving cautiously to avoid police. This indicates that he had not reached safety yet.
?????????17

Therefore when he swerved as a result of the shattered windshield, and as a result hit and killed Vic, who was standing on the roadside, that death would result in felony murder.
Degrees of murder - Under common law, there were no degrees of murder, but modernly, first degree murder applies to premeditation and deliberation or felony murder. Here Bill would be guilty of first degree felony murder.
Conspiracy to murder Al
Conspiracy under common law is complete when two or more persons agree to commit an unlawful act. Under modern law, conspiracy also requires an act in furtherance.
Chuck's liability and Dave's liability
Here Chuck agreed with Dave and they bought a shotgun they were going to use to kill Al. Therefore the conspiracy was complete as there was an agreement to perform an unlawful act (murder). The purchase of the shotgun was the substantial step. Both Chuck and Dave are guilty of conspiracy to murder Al.
Chuck's withdrawal from the conspiracy
To avoid vicarious liability for the acts that are reasonably foreseeable in furtherance of the conspiracy, a conspirator may withdraw by advising all coconspirators of his withdrawal. However in many jurisdictions unless he thwarts the objective, he is still liable. If the withdrawal is effective, the actor will still be liable for the conspiracy but not any subsequent crimes.
Chuck's coconspirator liability for muder of Al and Pinkerton Rule
Under the Pinkerton rule all coconspirators are held vicariously liable for all unlawful acts that are reasonably foreseeable toward the goal of the conspiracy. If Chuck's withdrawal was not effective, he would be liable for the murder of Al as a coconspirator.
Dave's liability for murder of Al Murder (defined supra)
Intent to kill (supra) Here Dave had planned the murder of Al, purchased a shotgun, and killed Al.
Causation His actions were the direct cause of Al's death. Dave is guilty of intent to kill, murder.
???????18

Degrees of murder - (defined supra)
Here the murder of Al was carried out with premeditation and deliberation. This
type of murder is first degree murder. Dave is guilty in the murder of Al. Theft of Al's watch by Dave
Larceny - Trespassory taking and carrying away the personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here Dave took Al's watch off his wrist after killing him and kept it. The theft was complete and Dave is guilty of theft.
Chuck's liability for theft of Al's watch
Coconspirator liability only extends to any criminal acts committed in furtherance and that are reasonably foreseeable to the objective of the conspiracy. Here the conspiracy was for murder not theft and theft was not part of the plan.
Therefore Chuck would not be liable for theft (larceny).
????19

Al: Murder
Answer B to Question 2
?Murder is the unlawful killing of a human or fetus with malice aforethought. Malice includes an intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily injury, or an abandoned/malignant heart.
Although Al's act of throwing the rock resulted in an accident causing the death of another, he did not show the necessary malice required, as he was just throwing rocks at a tree on the side of the road while waiting for the bus.
Al did not commit murder.
Al: Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary Manslaughter is homicide without malice. The homicide may be caused with the intent to inflict less than serious bodily injury, or during the commission of an unenumerated felony.
Al was simply throwing rocks at a tree. He was not acting with intent to cause any injuries, serious or not, nor was he committing a felony.
Al did not commit Involuntary Manslaughter. Al's Defense: Infancy
There is a rebuttable presumption of inability to form intent for children between the ages of 7 and 14.
Al did not commit any crime relating to the death of Vic.
Bill: First Degree Murder under the Felony Murder theory
First Degree Murder is murder by poison, torture, lying in wait, or murder done wilfully, deliberately, and premeditated, or felony murder. Felony Murder is a death caused during the commission, or while fleeing, from an enumerated felony, including Robbery.
The facts stipulate that Bill had been driving on his way from committing a robbery. The fact that he was driving carefully and under the speed limit does not change the fact that he was still fleeing from a robbery. However, the purpose of the Felony Murder rule is to deter from the commission of dangerous felonies, such as robbery, not to punish one for an unrelated incident. Apparently the police were not in pursuit of Bill; otherwise he would not have been avoiding detection. Acting so carefully as to avoid detection does not constitute fleeing.
???20

Fleeing implies that one is being pursued and trying to escape. Since Bill had already escaped, it can be argued that he has reached a point of temporary safety.
Bill should not be liable under the Felony Murder rule if it can be determined that he was not fleeing, and that he had reached a point of temporary safety. Deaths caused after one has reached a point of temporary safety are not Felony Murder.
Bill: Vehicular Manslaughter
Vehicular Manslaughter is homicide by means of negligent operation of a vehicle.
Because Bill swerved as a result of a rock shattering his windshield, he cannot be found to have been driving negligently, causing the death of Vic.
Bill should not be found guilty of any crime relating to the death of Vic.
Chuck and Dave: Conspiracy
Conspiracy consists of an agreement, intent to agree, intent to pursue an unlawful objective, and as a modern rule, an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy.
The facts stipulate that Chuck and Dave carefully planned to commit murder. This satisfies the requirements of an agreement and the intent to agree. The facts go on to reveal that they bought a shotgun in preparation for carrying out their plan. This is the overt act required and shows that they did intend to pursue their unlawful objective.
Chuck: Withdrawal from Conspiracy
Withdrawal from conspiracy does not relieve liability for the conspiracy itself. It may, however, relieve liability for any subsequent crimes in furtherance of the conspiracy. The fact that Chuck decided not to follow through with the plan does not relieve him for liability for the conspiracy because the crime has already been completed upon purchase of the shotgun.
Dave: First Degree Murder
First Degree Murder is murder by poison, torture, lying in wait, or murder done wilfully, deliberately, and premeditated, or felony murder.
The facts stipulate that the murder was done wilfully, deliberately, and it was premeditated.
Dave should be found guilty of First Degree Murder.
????21

Chuck: Accomplice Liability
Accomplices are liable for the crime itself. However, Chuck was not an accomplice because he was not present during the commission of the crime.
Chuck: Accessory before the fact to Murder
Because Chuck participated in the planning of the murder and the purchase of the murder weapon, although he was not a principal in the murder of Vic, he should be held liable as an accessory before the fact to murder.
Dave: Robbery
Robbery is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another, from the person or presence, by means of force, fear, intimidation, and the intent to deprive permanently.
Because Al was already dead when Dave took the watch, Dave did not take it by means of force, fear, or intimidation. A dead person cannot have these emotions.
Dave has not committed robbery. Dave: Larceny
Larceny is the trespassory taking and asportation of the personal property of another with the intent to deprive permanently at the time of the taking.
The facts stipulate that Dave took the watch from Al's arm and kept it for himself. Dave has committed larceny.
Chuck's liability for the larceny
Chuck should not be liable for the larceny because it was not a foreseeable act in furtherance of the conspiracy.
?????22

Question 3
Apple Orchards ("Apple"), a grower of apples, entered into a written contract with Best Bakery ("Bakery") to supply Bakery with all of Bakery's apple requirements for one year. Under the contract, Apple was required to deliver on the first day of each month the quantity of apples that Bakery required. The contract price was $5,000 per month, payable upon delivery of each shipment.
Apple delivered the required quantity each month for the first six months. At the end of the sixth month, Apple assigned its contract with Bakery to FruitCo, which undertook to deliver the requisite quantities for the remainder of the contract term. Bakery, having some doubts about FruitCo's reliability, wrote both Apple and FruitCo a letter in which Bakery stated, "I want to be absolutely sure that both Apple and FruitCo will guarantee that I receive the quantity of apples that I require each month."
Neither Apple nor FruitCo responded to Bakery's letter. In the seventh and eighth months of the contract, FruitCo made deliveries that were substantially short of the quantity that Bakery required and that Apple had previously delivered. Nevertheless, Bakery accepted and paid for the short shipments.
At the end of the eighth month, Bakery entered into a contract with Davis Farms ("Davis") to supply Bakery with its requirements for apples for the remaining four months of the year. The contract price was $7,500 per month, payable upon delivery of each shipment. Bakery wrote a letter to Apple and FruitCo informing them that Bakery would no longer accept any apple shipments from either of them.
Bakery then sued both Apple and FruitCo for breach of contract to recover the difference between the Apple/FruitCo contract price and the Davis contract price.
Apple defended on the ground that, after its assignment to FruitCo, it was no longer liable to Bakery. FruitCo filed a counterclaim for breach of contract against Bakery to recover its lost profits.
Which party is likely to prevail in the lawsuit involving: 1. Bakery vs. Apple? Discuss.
2. Bakery vs. FruitCo? Discuss.
23

Answer A to Question 3
1. Bakery v. Apple (B v. A)
Does UCC apply?
UCC applies to contracts for the sale of goods. Here, the disputed matter is apples, also known as perishable goods. UCC is in accord.
Is there a valid contract? Offer
Under UCC, a contract can be made in any sufficient manner to show the intention of the parties.
At common law, an offer requires a manifestation of present contractual intent in which the definite and certain terms are communicated to the offeree, creating the power of acceptance.
Here, A entered into a written contract with B. The terms of the offer stated that A was to supply B with all of B's apple requirements for one year. Therefore, an offer was made for the purposes of UCC; if the parties so intended then a contract was entered into.
Requirements/Output
A requirement/output contract requires the parties of a contract to deal exclusively with each other for the purposes agreed upon in regards to quantity.
Here, a valid requirements/output contract was entered into by A & B, in that A, grower of apples, agreed to output all of B's apple requirements for one year.
Statute of Frauds
Requires that certain contracts must be in writing. One of those requirements is that the sale of goods contract of $500 or more must be in writing. Here, the contract price was $5,000 per month and was written; therefore, the Statute is satisfied.
Firm Offer
Under UCC, and offer made by a merchant is irrevocable without consideration for the time stated in the offer or reasonable period of time, not to exceed three months.
???????24

Acceptance
Manifestation of assent to the terms of the offer
Here, the facts state that there is a valid contract; therefore acceptance has been assented to.
Consideration
Bargained for exchange in which there is a benefit conferred and detriment relied, causing something of value to be transferred between the parties. Under UCC, consideration is not required, only good faith and commercial reasonableness between the parties.
Here, $5,000 per month is to be paid by B to A for all B's apple requirements to be supplied by A for one year. This is valid consideration.
Therefore, there is a valid contract.
Assignment of Contract
An assignment is the right to receive. A party in a contract may assign their rights to another to receive as long as the contract does not state otherwise. Even if the contract does state otherwise the party has the power to assign the right to receive.
Here, A assigned its contract with B to Fruitco (F), which undertook to deliver the requisite quantities for the remainder of the contract term. There is no language to state otherwise; therefore there was a valid assignment between B to F.
Under UCC, a valid assignment automatically carries with it the delegation of duties under the contract. A delegation is the right to perform under the contract. Here, when Fruitco undertook duty to deliver the requisite quantities for the remainder of the contract term, a valid delegation of duties was created under the contract. If F in any way breaches his duty to perform, then A can sue either B or F. Here, Bakery exercises that right to sue A for the breach of contract when F failed to perform as A did by delivering substantially short quantities of the apples Bakery required.
Demand of Assurance
Under UCC, if a merchant has reason to believe that the contracting party will not perform under the contract, then he may demand assurance of their performance. If the other party does not respond back within 30 days, then the party can presume by their conduct that they do not intend to perform, creating an immediate action for breach of contract.
????25

Here, B had some doubts about F's reliability. It is unstated whether he was warranted in doubting F, but nonetheless, he wrote a letter stating "I want to be absolutely sure that both Apple and Fruitco will guarantee that I receive the quantity of apples that I require each month." Neither A nor F responded to his letter. A, who validly assigned the contract to F may have a defense in that he had been discharged of his duty to perform and right to receive by vesting power of assignment and delegation in F. F, on the other hand, is the primary party whose performance B is demanding assurance about. Since B did not get any response back within 30 days, then he can infer from his conduct that he does not intend to perform under the contract.
Seller's Breach
In order to prevail under breach, it must be determined whether or not a major or minor breach occurred. This is shown by whether or not the parties substantially performed under the contract. If substantial performance can be shown, then there is only a minor breach; if not then there is a major breach.
Here, the original contract before assigned required that A supply B with all B's apple requirements for one year. A delivered the required quantity for the first six months. At the end of the sixth month A assigned the contract with B to F. If the courts determine that A materially breached the contract with B, then B would be entitled to the difference between the A/F contract price of $5,000 per month and the Davis contract price of $7,500 per month plus incidental damages.
Therefore, it is likely that Bakery will prevail.
Bakery v. FruitCo (B v. F)
Prospective Inability not to Perform
Conduct by breaching part showing that he is not forthcoming to perform at the time it is due.
Here, F did not respond nor did he deliver the correct quantity of goods that B required in the seventh and eighth months of the contract. Therefore, B could have reasonably believed that F has no intention of performing the contract as promised.
Accepting non-conforming goods
If a seller sends non-conforming goods as an accommodation to the buyer, the buyer has the choice to accept all the goods, reject all the goods, accept in part, reject in part.
????26

Here, although F delivered a substantially short quantity of apples that B required, B nevertheless accepted and paid for the short shipment. Therefore by his conduct, B accepted non-conforming goods and should not be able to bring suit for the loss of goods.
Damages
B would be entitled to damages for the difference in price to "cover" and the contract price plus incidental damages.
Therefore, it is likely that F would prevail under the lawsuit.
?27

Answer B to Question 3
BAKERY (B) V. APPLE (A) and Fruitco (F)
Governing law?
Since this is a contract for the sale of goods, and not for a service or real estate transaction, the UCC will govern. Goods are defined as movable, tangible objects at the time of the contract.
Merchants?
Special rules apply to parties to a UCC K when they are both merchants, or parties who normally deal in the type of goods in the K or have a specific expertise in the goods. Here, Apple (A) is a grower who normally sells apples, and B is a baker who normally buys apples to incorporate into her baked goods.
Writing required?
A writing is required under the Statute of Frauds for the sale of goods which are over $500. Here, since the K calls for $5000/mo, a writing is required. Here, there is a writing to support the K.
Valid Contract?
A valid contract is a promise or set of promises that for the breach of there is a remedy at law, and performance of the law considers a duty. In order for there to be a valid K, there must be mutual assent (offer and acceptance), consideration or substitute, and no defenses to formation.
Offer?
An offer is a promise, undertaking or commitment, manifesting and present intent to be bound, with definite and certain terms, communicated to an identifiable offeree so that a reasonable person would construe it as inviting acceptance.
Here, we have a Requirements K for the supply of apples. A has agreed to sell to B all of the apples it may require (promise), for one year at the price of $5000/mo (certain terms), and presumably signed by both parties (which demonstrates it was communicated to B). Because both parties are merchants, quantity does not have to be given in definite terms; they have an implied duty of good faith with respect to the quantity of the requirements. A court will find there is sufficient certainty of terms to find a valid offer.
?????28

Acceptance?
An acceptance is an unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer, made under no undue pressure or absent fraud or misrepresentation. Here, since the facts indicate there was a written K between A and B there was an acceptance. Also, substantial performance of bilateral installments K is deemed to be effective acceptance.
Consideration?
Consideration is the exchange of some form of legal detriment by the parties to a contract. The courts do not generally look into the adequacy of consideration, as long as it was in good faith. Furthermore, a K between merchants under the UCC requires no consideration, just that the parties agree to the terms of the K in good faith. However, there is still valid consideration here, where A has promised to sell apples, and B has promised to pay for them; therefore they have both incurred legal detriment.
Assignment/Third Party Beneficiary?
An assignment occurs where a party to a K (assignor) assigns his rights or responsibilities under a K to another party (assignee). Assignments are generally permitted as long as they do not materially alter the responsibilities or rights of either party to the K. Here, A has assigned its responsibilities to perform under the K with B to Fruitco (F). Such an assignment is legal and not a breach of the original K with B so long as it doesn't materially affect the benefit of the bargain that B expected from A, and as long as their K does not invalidate assignment. Also, A's assignment to F does not relieve A from liability under the K with B, and B can sue either one of them for breach of K. Here, B is a third party beneficiary of the assignment between A and F, and can sue either one of them for breach of K.
Demand for assurances?
Where a party to a K has doubts about the other's ability to perform according to the terms of their K, she may make a demand for assurances for the continued dedication of the other party. Where the party making such demand does not receive adequate assurances within a timely manner, the demanding party may treat it as an Anticipatory Repudiation.
Anticipatory Repudiation?
Where a party has received either an unequivocal statement from the other party of their intention not to perform under a K, or where the party has failed to give adequate assurances of continued performance when requested to do so, the nonbreaching party may 1) treat the repudiation as a breach and sue
??29

immediately, 2) suspend her own performance and wait 'til the time the other party's performance is due, 3) make demand for assurances, or 4) do nothing and encourage performance.
Here, although there were no responses from either A or F in the demand for assurances, there was still not an unequivocal statement indicating an unwillingness to perform, and F did in fact make further shipments. Therefore, there likely was not an anticipatory repudiation.
Buyer's Rights of Rejection?
A buyer of goods may completely reject a nonconforming shipment, keep the entire nonconforming shipment, or keep only the commercial units and reject the rest. Here, although the quantity of apples was substantially short of the quantity B needed, she nevertheless kept the shipment and paid for them.
Breach?
A party has breached a K when she has failed to substantially conform to the terms of the K. Here, there is a question as to whether the short shipments by F constituted a material breach by F. The original K was satisfactorily performed by A for the first six months, and although B received two short shipments, that may not constitute a material breach and entitle B to cancel the K and seek cover. The facts indicate that she made no demands for a cure, not even a complaint about the nonconforming shipments by F. As mentioned above, a buyer has a right to reject certain shipments in an installments/requirements K, or to request that F cure the shipment, but she may not treat the whole original K between B and A as materially breached without first requesting a cure; therefore she was not justified in breaching the K and contracting with Davis Farms.
Damages?
B will sue for expectation damages, in other words, to receive the benefit of the bargain as if the K had been fully performed. Since she feels that A and F breached, she will want to recover the difference between market price and K price for the remaining 4 shipments she purchased from Davis, plus any incidental (cost of cover) and consequential damages (if foreseeable at time of K). However, since she was unjustified in rescinding the K between B and A, she will likely not be able to recover the damages.
Expectation damages?
Expectation damages are available to a nonbreaching party, giving them the benefit of the bargain they K for. Here, F and A might countersue B for expectation damages since they are relatively easy to assess, at 5K/mo. However, if the courts find that the damages are difficult to assess, then they can
30

sue for any costs incurred in reliance of the K under a Promissory Estoppel theory.
Can B sue either F or A?
As mentioned above, since A was not relieved from liability under the K with B, A and F can both be liable jointly to B; however, B's suit will likely fail.
31

Question 4
A residence hall on the campus of University was evacuated after a number of student residents became seriously ill from aerial dispersal of bacteria that had infested the air conditioning system. Reputable consultants retained by University to prescribe a remedy for the infestation advised University that there were three ways to proceed: the cheapest would be to purge the air conditioning system with disinfectants, which had usually taken care of the problem in several other similar circumstances; a more expensive method would be to seal off and fumigate the building, which would be more effective; and the most expensive, and the most effective, would be to do multiple sealed fumigations.
To minimize the expense, University chose the cheapest method. University was also motivated by the need to recover revenues that it had lost during the closure and by the need to be able to provide desperately needed housing for the students. After allowing time for the disinfectant to work its way out of the air conditioning system, University reopened the residence hall and advertised reduced rates to induce students to move back in.
Paula and her roommate Art, students attracted by the reduced rates, spoke with University's Director of Student Housing, who told them that it was safe to move back. Paula said, "Well, I guess I have to rely on your judgment." Art agreed, saying, "At that price, it's worth the risk." They resumed living in the residence hall. Soon after they moved back, Paula and Art had an argument, which left Paula harboring anger against Art.
Within a month, Paula fell ill with the same bacterial infection. Art did not become ill. However, while waiting for an ambulance to pick her up, Paula stuffed Art's pillow into the ventilator duct with the intent of allowing the pillow to accumulate as much bacteria as possible. She then placed the pillow on Art's bed. A week later, Art became ill with the same infection.
Paula and Art each wish to sue University for personal injury. What theory of liability should they assert, what defenses might University raise against each, and who would be likely to prevail in each suit? Discuss.
32

?Paula v. University
Answer A to Question 4
I. Negligence? Negligence is the failure to act as a reasonable person would under the same or similar circumstances. In order to establish the prima facie case for negligence, Paula would need to show that University owed her a duty, breached that duty, and the breach was the actual and proximate cause of the injuries she suffered, and a lack of defenses.
Duty? One who acts affirmatively owes a duty of reasonable care to all foreseeable plaintiffs within the zone of danger. Here, University acted affirmatively by its actions to remedy the bacteria infestations and by then inviting the students to move back into the residence hall. Further, there will also be a duty imposed on the relationship between the University and the students. Therefore, duty will be established.
Standard of care? The standard of care will be that of a reasonable person. And, because of the unique relationship between the students and the University, University may also be held to a higher standard of care.
Breach? Breach is the failure to act as a reasonable person under same or similar circumstances. Breach can be established if the probability and likelihood of harm is greater than the burden to mitigate and the utility of the defendant's actions. Here, the University already had similar outbreaks of the bacteria infestation and a number of students had become seriously ill from aerial dispersal of bacteria in the air conditioning system, which would suggest that the probability of harm was fairly high. Additionally, the students were described as "seriously ill" from the bacterial infections. The University had three methods of dealing with the bacteria, and chose the one that was the cheapest - which had usually worked in the past. However, the fact that it "had worked in the past" implies that the issue was a recurring problem, and it's likely not reasonable to go with a method that may or may not permanently correct the issue. The facts also state that the University went with the cheapest option in order to gain back some revenues and "minimize the expense" as well as to provide much needed housing for students. Cost alone is probably not enough to justify a less effective option, and the facts state only that it usually worked in the past - which implies the university knew that the method might not work. Further, there are no facts to suggest the University tested to ensure the bacteria was gone. As for much needed housing, which the University may use to establish the utility of their actions, having the students move in, only to get sick and have to move back out doesn't make the housing situation better. Therefore, because there were other viable means to disinfect, and other steps that likely could have been taken to test to ensure the bacteria was gone, the University will be found to have acted unreasonably.
???33

Causation? The University is the actual cause of Paula's injuries because "but for" their actions, Paula would not have been exposed to the bacteria and become ill. There are no intervening acts; therefore the University will also be the proximate cause of Paula's injuries.
Damages? Here, the facts show that Paula fell ill with a bacterial infection; therefore damages are established.
Defenses?
a. Contributory Negligence/Comparative Fault? In jurisdictions which follow contributory negligence, any fault on behalf of the plaintiff is a complete bar to recovery. Modernly, most jurisdictions follow comparative fault rules which will reduce the plaintiff's recovery by the percentage of fault attributable to the plaintiff. Here, the facts show that Paula said, "well, I guess I have to rely on your judgment" and resumed living in the residence hall. It's unlikely that moving back in after being told it was safe to do is unreasonable, but if it is found that it is then Paula's recovery will be reduced (comparative fault) or barred (contributory negligence).
b. Assumption of the risk? Assumption of the risk is a complete bar to recovery, and can be expressed or implied. Here, Paula's statement "well, I guess I have to rely on your judgment" is unlikely to be viewed as an expressed assumption of the risk. To be implied, University must show that Paula knew the risk, understood the risk, and voluntarily chose to encounter it. There are no facts that suggest that Paula knew there was a risk or understood the risk - she was merely relying on the judgment of the University's Director of Housing. Therefore, this defense will fail.
Therefore, Paula will recover from University for negligence.
II. Breach of expressed warranty? University may be held vicariously liable under the doctrine of respondeat superior because the University's Director of Student Housing told Paula and Art that "it was safe to move back in." Paula may be able to recover for breach of express warranty.
II. Vicarious liability for actions by the Director of Student Housing? Employers are held vicariously liable for the torts committed by their employees within the scope of their employment. Here, it may be established that the University's Director of Student Housing (employee of University) was negligent in telling Paula that it was safe to move back. He was certainly acting within the scope of his employment as he was encouraging them to move back into the residence hall. Negligence defined supra. Duty of reasonableness based on affirmative act (telling her it was safe); causation will be established because "but for" his statement Paula wouldn't have moved back in, and because the presence of bacteria was foreseeable proximate cause is established. Plus, the
?????34

presence of bacteria will likely be viewed as a "set stage" and not an intervening act. Paula was injured and the same defenses as above will apply. Therefore, if telling the students it was safe to move back in was unreasonable, the Director will have breached his duty, and University will be held vicariously liable.
Art v. University
I. Negligence? Supra. Duty, standard of care, breach and damages will be the same as above discussion.
Causation? Here, "but for" University's actions, Art would not have fallen ill from the bacteria. Although the facts show that Paula stuffed Art's pillow into the ventilator duct to accumulate the bacteria, and that Art didn't become ill as early as Paula did, at a minimum the University is a substantial factor because if it weren't for their actions Paula wouldn't have been able to accumulate the bacteria. University may claim that they are not the proximate cause and that Paula's acts of accumulating the bacteria in the pillow and placing it on Art's bed is a supervening act sufficient to cut off University's liability. As a general rule, intentional torts and crimes are not foreseeable, while negligence is not, and clearly Paula committed an intentional tort. However, there are two problems with this argument. First, we don't know whether or not Art fell ill because of the pillow or because of his residency in the University Hall. Secondly, his method of exposure may have been "intensified" due to Paula's actions; it is foreseeable that he would fall ill from the exposure to the bacteria. Therefore, Art will establish causation.
Defenses?
a. Contributory negligence/comparative fault? Supra. Same argument as above.
b. Assumption of the risk? Supra. Here, the facts show that Art stated "at that price, it's worth the risk", which may be sufficient to establish that Art expressly accepted the risk of exposure to the bacteria. At a minimum, there is a strong argument that he impliedly assumed the risk, because he knew there was a risk of exposure to bacteria and he chose to accept it. However, it's also likely assumption of the risk was negated due to the University's Director telling him "it was safe." Notwithstanding Art's comments, there are no facts to suggest that Art knew bacteria would be a problem.
Therefore, Art will recover from the University for negligence.
II. Breach of expressed warranty? Supra, Art will recover for the reason Paula will recover.
????35

III. Vicarious liability for Director? Supra, Art will recover for the same reason Paula will recover.
36

A. Negligence?
Answer B to Question 4
I. Paula v. University
Negligence is the failure of a duty to render a standard of care to any foreseeable plaintiff. Negligence is composed of the elements of duty, breach, causation, and damages, to be discussed below. Finally, defenses of the defendant will be discussed.
1. Duty is the obligation to render the appropriate standard of care. Here, University has an obligation, mainly by contract, to provide safe and effective housing for its students. University is aware that there is a problem owing to aerial dispersion of bacteria in their air conditioning systems. Given the contract duty, the students, Paula and Art, have the status as invitees in that they pay tuition and pay for housing. This yields an enhanced standard of care owed by University to Paula (and Art) to actively identify and correct any dangers, such as that of bacterial infection owing to the air conditioning system.
2. Breach is a failure to render or adhere to that standard of care. Here, University was aware of the risk of bacterial illness following remediation and identified 3 alternatives ranging in costs from cheapest to most expensive and along that spectrum, from least effective to most effective. University chose the cheapest and thus the least effective. Although not necessarily a breach established, there is the opportunity to apply some form of risk - utility analysis such as the Learned Hand analysis, where one balances the probability of harm multiplied by the gravity of that harm, and compares that to the cost or Burden to mitigate that harm. Here, the University has performed what appears to be a qualitative analysis rather than a quantitative risk assessment. University chose the cheapest and least effective in an effort to save money and remain within budgetary constraints. This may be a prudent strategy - a common strategy; however, additional care may be appropriate to discern the actual risk and make a more prudent decision based on quantitative analysis.
3. Causation is divided into issues of actual cause and proximate cause. Actual cause must meet the "but for" test - "but for" the plaintiff's [sic] actions, the harm would not have occurred. Here, the decision of University to reopen the residence houses is most likely an actual cause. Had University supplied other housing options or completely replaced the air conditioning system, perhaps Paula would not have gotten ill. This brings about the issue of res ipsa loquitur. Typically a concept used to establish breach, it feeds into causation in that the elements are that the true reason for plaintiff's harm is not known or fully explained, the harm more likely can be attributed to the actions of the defendant in that the conditions that brought about the harm are exclusively within the
37

control of the defendant, and the plaintiff (Paula or Art) did not contribute to the condition.
For proximate cause, there should not be any intervening, supervening events. Here, Paula became ill after living in the residence for a period of time. The facts do not present any potential intervening events, aside from an argument with Art. Given that there is no evidence this additional stress may have weakened her health system, there is no other event and the air impurification is the proximate cause of her illness.
4. Damages are the harm(s) suffered by the plaintiff - typically in the form of general and special. Here, Paula suffered ill health and presumably medical expenses. These expenses are readily monetized and fall under the category of general damages. However, unknown or latent effects may be appropriate, but cannot be discerned and calculated for value at this time. However, Paula became ill and there are damages.
B. Defenses of University
Traditionally, defenses for negligence cases are contributory negligence, comparative fault, assumption of the risk, and a counterdefense that the plaintiff may apply is avoidable risk/last clear chance. Here, assumption of the risk requires that the plaintiff know the risk, understand and appreciate the risk, and voluntarily encounter the risk. Arguably, Paula was only somewhat aware of the risk, not knowing. Arguably, she appreciated the risk in awareness of the potential severity of an illness. She made a conscious decision to encounter the risk in that she asked questions of the housing director and mulled over the decision. University is in a fairly strong position to say that Paula accepted the risk. However, Paula can assert that "Well, I guess I have to rely on your judgment." As such, she acknowledged that she was not an expert and that she was not in a position to truly appreciate the risk - she relied on the judgment of the Housing Director.
In conclusion, Paula is more likely to prevail on this given that University was active in selecting an option that, for Paula, was ineffective in protecting her from the harm of bacterial illness. Absent any clear defenses beyond assumption of the risk, University is unlikely to prevail.
II. Art v. University
A. Negligence?
Negligence is defined supra, consisting of duty, breach, cause, and damages. 1. Duty - defined supra and the analysis remains the same as for Paula.
38

2. Breach - defined supra and the analysis concerning the Learned Hand Risk Utility Balance test and the Res Ipsa Loquitur remain the same.
3. Causation - defined supra. Actual cause remains the same as for Paula. However, for proximate cause, there is a potential intervening, supervening event. Here, Art had not become ill until after Paula stuffed his pillow into the air conditioning ventilator. However, this was during the relatively short time that she waited for the ambulance. This period may not have been long enough to matter. There is no way to know whether some lingering bacteria accumulated in the pillow, but more importantly, there is no way to know whether Art's resistance to bacterial illness was more than most and that this incident was enough to weaken his resistance. Proximate cause may possibly be established.
4. Damages - defined as general and special supra. Art became ill a week after Paula. Damages established.
Defenses of University
Assumption of the risk is the defense defined supra and applicable again. Here, Art indicated that "at that price, it's worth the risk". This appears to indicate that Art knew the risk, appreciated the risk, and voluntarily encountered the risk. However, just because he said "it's worth the risk" doesn't mean that he truly appreciated the risk. That may have simply been a saying of Art, having little credence. Finally, Art, like Paula, was in a position where he may have had little choice of options.
In conclusion for Art, University is probably in a stronger position to prevail given the defense of assumption of the risk and Art's statement of "it's worth the risk," and that perhaps University can attack the element of causation for Art's illness as the proximate cause element.
?39


??California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2008
?1

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2008 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2008 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions.
??Question Number
1. 2. 3. 4.
Subject Page
Torts 4 Criminal Law 17 Contracts 30
???Torts
41
2

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?3

Question 1
Twelve-year-old Charlie was riding on his small, motorized 3-wheeled all terrain vehicle ("ATV") in his family's large front yard. Suddenly, finding the steering wheel stuck in place, Charlie was unable to steer the ATV, and he panicked. Instead of applying the brakes or turning off the ATV, he jumped off of it and ran away. The ATV continued on its own, rolled out of the yard and into the residential street, directly in front of a car driven by Paul. Paul was sending a text message on his cell phone while driving. He failed to see the ATV roll into the street and he crashed into it. Although the ATV was not large, it was heavy enough that the accident caused serious personal injuries to Paul, and significant damage to his car.
An examination of the wreckage of the ATV showed that the steering wheel stuck because of a malfunction of the steering system. The ATV and the steering system are manufactured by KiddieRides-R-Us.
Under what theory or theories might Paul recover, and what is his likelihood of success, against:
a. Charlie?
b. KiddieRides-R-Us?
Discuss.
4

NEGLIGENCE
Answer A to Question 1 a. Paul (P) v. Charlie (C)
P may assert a negligence claim against C. To establish a prima facie case for negligence, the plaintiff must prove: i) the existence of a duty on the defendant to conform to a specific standard of conduct for the protection of the plaintiff against unreasonable risks of injury; ii) a breach of this duty by the defendant; iii) the breach of duty is the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injury; and iv) the plaintiff suffered damages to her person or property.
DUTY
The general duty owed by a defendant is the reasonable person standard, i.e., the defendant is under a duty to act like a reasonable, ordinary, and prudent person and take precautions against creating unreasonable risks of injury to others. The duty is owed to any foreseeable plaintiff. Note that in a situation where the "unforeseeable plaintiff" problem arises, the result depends on whether the Andrews View is followed (which provides that all persons who suffered injury as a proximate result of the defendant's act can be a plaintiff), or the Cardozo View is followed (the plaintiff must be within the zone of increased danger created by the defendant's act).
Duty owed by a child
When the defendant is a child, the duty imposed on the child will be in accordance with the child's age, intelligence, experience, and education. Note that if the child is engaged in an activity of adults, the standard would also be that of an adult.
Here, P would argue that C owes a duty to exercise reasonable care in operating the ATV to prevent it from entering the street, where foreseeable plaintiff may be injured. Further, when it malfunctioned, C should have applied the brake, as a reasonable person would do.
C would counter by arguing that because he is only twelve years old, he may not be under a duty to act with the level of intelligence and experience P is trying to
5

establish. C would also argue that riding an ATV is not an activity commonly engaged by adults; therefore, a standard applicable to adults should not be imposed. However, P would argue that a child of C's age and experience should be able to stop the ATV in this situation. P is likely to succeed.
BREACH OF DUTY
The defendant breaches his duty when he fails to live up to the applicable standard of care. Here, P would argue that C failed to apply the brake, which constitutes a breach of duty. Breach of duty may be established by direct evidence, circumstantial evidence (res ipsa loquitur), or breach of a statute. Here, there is direct evidence of C's act.
CAUSA TION
Actual Cause
P would argue that "but for" C's failure to stop the ATV, he would not have suffered the injury. Therefore, the actual causation requirement is met. Note that although C's act standing alone is insufficient to cause the injury, it is nonetheless an actual cause. In cases where there are more than one acts, if any one standing alone is sufficient to cause the result, then that act is an actual cause if it is a substantial factor.
Proximate Cause
The general rule elating to proximate cause is that all consequences that are the normal incidents of and within the increased risk of the defendant's act are proximately caused by his act. The test is one of foreseeability. When there are intervening forces, such forces may break the chain of proximate causation if they are so unforeseeable to constitute a supervening event.
Here, P would argue that C's failure to stop the ATV foreseeably caused it to enter the street and collide with his car. C would argue, however, that P's own act of sending a text message constitutes an intervening event that is unforeseeable and supervening. C would also argue that the ATV's malfunctioning also intervenes with the causal chain. However, P would argue that it is foreseeable that normal negligent acts may occur when motorists are
6

driving nearby, and C's acts increased the risk of the harmful result (collision). P is likely to establish that proximate cause exists.
DAMAGES
P would argue that he suffered damages to his person ("serious personal injuries") and his property ("significant damages to his car"). Therefore, the damage element exists. P would recover pain and suffering (including emotional distress if he suffered from personal injury as a result of physical impact or threat of physical impact - note that the "zone of danger" doctrine need not be discussed here), lost wages and earning capacity (future capacity will be reduced to present value), medical expense, and loss of consortium.
DEFENSES
Contributory Negligence
In a contributory negligence jurisdiction, when the plaintiff's negligent act contributorily caused his injury, he is barred from recovery. Plaintiff is under a duty to conform to the same reasonable person standard.
Here, C would argue that P is contributorily negligent in sending a text message while driving. Therefore, in a contributory negligence jurisdiction, C has a defense. Note that the last clear chance rule does not apply because the plaintiff's negligence did not occur prior to the defendant's.
Comparative Negligence
In a comparative negligence jurisdiction, the plaintiff's recovery would be reduced in proportion to his own negligence. Here, C would argue that P is contributorily negligent in sending a text message while driving; therefore his recovery would be reduced in an amount proportional to his negligence.
Assumption of Risk
Assumption of Risk occurs when one knowingly and voluntarily enters or stays in the danger. Here P did not know about the danger; therefore this defense does not exist.
7

b. PAUL (P) v. KIDDIERIDES-R-US (K) PRODUCTS LIABILITY
Products liability is a generic term referring to the liability of a supplier of a defective product to one who suffered injury caused by the product's defect. Products liability can be based on the tort theories of strict liability, negligence, misrepresentation and breach of warranty, and in certain cases intentional torts.
STRICT LIABILITY
Strict liability in torts refers to the imposition of liability without a finding of fault. A prima facie case for strict liability requires the following elements: i) an absolute duty owed by the defendant to make safe (defendant must be a commercial supplier in a strict products liability case); ii) breach of that duty by the defendant; iii) the defendant's breach of duty is the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injury; and iv) damages to the plaintiff's person or property.
In a strict products liability claim, the key elements include: i) the defendant is a commercial supplier (manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler, retailer, and similar parties in the commercial supply chain of the product). A casual seller would not suffice; ii) the product is defective when it left the control of the defendant; iii) the product was not expected to and in fact did not experience substantial alteration; iv) no privity (contractual relationship) is required; the defendant is liable for the buyer, user, and bystander who suffered injury caused by the defect; v) the defendant is expected to anticipate foreseeable misuse by the product's user.
Commercial Supplier and Duty
Here, P would argue that K is clearly a commercial supplier because it is the manufacturer of the ATV. As a manufacturer, K owes a duty to supply a safe product that is free of unreasonably dangerous defects. K placed the ATV in the stream of commerce, therefore owes such a duty.
Defective Product - Breach of Duty
A product is defective if it is unreasonably dangerous, i.e. dangerous beyond the expectation of an ordinary consumer. Generally, the type of defects of a product include: i) design defect, where the product is defective in its design and where a
8

less dangerous design is commercially feasible; ii) manufacturing defect, where the defect arises from the manufacturing process and the product failed to conform to its specifications; and iii) failure to give adequate warning.
Here, P would argue that the ATV is an unreasonably dangerous product because it malfunctioned during its ordinary course of use. Such malfunctioning is clearly beyond the reasonable expectation of an ordinary consumer. The malfunctioning is likely the result of a manufacturing defect.
Product Defective and not Substantially Altered
P would also argue that the ATV was defective when it left the control of K and was not substantially altered. There is no indication in the facts that the product was expected to or did in fact undergo substantial alteration. Here, an inference similar to the one used in the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur (the thing speaks for itself) may be invoked to prove this argument.
Privity is not Required
Here, K may try to argue that P is not in privity (e.g. a direct sale contractual relationship) with K. However, privity is not required for strict products liability. Therefore, as a foreseeable bystander who drives on the street near which the ATV is used, P would argue that he is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Causation
P would argue that his injury was actually caused by the ATV's defect. "But for" the ATV's defect, he would not have collided with the ATV and suffered the injury.
P would also argue that his injury was proximately caused by the ATV's product. The rules of proximate causation were discussed supra. Here, P would argue that it is a normal incident and foreseeable consequence that ATV's defect would result in it entering the street and causing the collision. K would attempt to argue that there are intervening forces such as C's failure to control the ATV, and P's own negligence. However, P would argue that these intervening forces are foreseeable (the misuse of C and his own sending text message while driving). And it is likely that the court would find that these intervening forces are not sufficient to break the chain of sperate causation.
9

Damages
Discussed supra (P v. C) Defenses
Contributory negligence is generally no defense in strict liability cases, unless the plaintiff knows of the defect and is subsequently negligent (which amounts to assumption of risk). Comparative negligence is a defense and discussed supra.
NEGLIGENCE
General rules of negligence are discussed supra (P v. C)
Here, in addition to the elements in the strict liability claim, P must establish that K is negligent. He may attempt to use the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur (the thing speaks for itself), and argue that the type of malfunction does not normally occur absent negligence, and that the accident is attributable to K since it is the manufacturer, and that the accident is not attributable to P himself.
Defenses
Discussed supra (P v. C)
BREACH OF WARRANTY AND MISREPRESENTATION
When a products fails its express warranty, implied warranty of merchantability (suitable for the ordinary purpose of its use), or when misrepresentation regarding the product by the supplier exists, this theory may be used. Here, the main issue is the implied warranty of merchantability, which is clearly breached. Privity is not required (horizontal privity not required under the modern trend). No fault need be proved. Defenses are similar to strict products liability cases.
10

Negligence?
Answer B to Question 1 Paul (P) v. Charlie (C)
?Negligence is where the defendant fails to conform his conduct to that of a reasonably prudent person in the same or similar circumstances and thereby creates an unreasonable risk of injury to foreseeable plaintiffs in the zone of danger. Negligence is proven where the defendant owes a duty, breaches that duty, is the actual and proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries and the plaintiff actually suffers injuries.
Duty?
C owes a general duty of care to avoid harming others. Breach?
C is a child and would normally be held to the child standard of care (that of children of the same age, experience and intelligence). However, when a child engages in dangerous or adult activities, the standard is elevated to that of an adult. Here, C is operating a motorized vehicle capable of doing great damage/harm if not handled in a safe/prudent fashion. C will be held to the standard of a reasonably prudent adult therefore.
Comparing C's conduct with that of a reasonably prudent adult, the question is now whether he behaved reasonably under the circumstances. It is somewhat likely that any adult might panic if faced with C's situation - the steering mechanism of his vehicle suddenly failing and his not knowing what to do, but wanting to avoid harm to himself by escaping the situation as quickly as possible. On the other hand, most adults would probably have the good sense to either shut off the motor and apply the brakes as quickly as possible. Such a move would be more likely to ensure one's safety as opposed to jumping from a moving vehicle. Further, it would be the best way to avoid harm to others or damage to property.
Conclusion: C, when held to the adult standard, has breached his duty to avoid unreasonable harm to others.
??11

Actual Cause?
Actual cause is where the but-for test is applied. Here we can easily state that but for C's failure to stop the ATV and by leaping off of it while still moving, P would not have collided with the ATV.
Proximate or Legal Cause?
This test asks if the harm done was foreseeable given the plaintiff's conduct. Here we can easily state that it was foreseeable that jumping off a moving vehicle (essentially creating a runaway vehicle) would create a very high risk of harm to others nearby.
Damages?
We are told that P suffered personal injuries and that his vehicle was damaged. Damages are established.
Defenses?
Emergency?
C might assert that his actions were understandable given that he was reacting to an emergency. This argument probably won't go far, however. As discussed above, most adults likely would know better than to abandon a moving vehicle and, rather, would attempt to stop it.
Contributory Negligence?
In a minority of jurisdictions, if the plaintiff's own negligence played even the smallest role in creating his damages, there is no recovery. Here, we are told that P was texting on the phone and therefore could not see the ATV in time to avoid hitting it. P had a duty to confirm his own behavior to avoid harm to himself and others. By carelessly texting while driving, P breached that duty in that his full attention was not on the road. But for his texting, P would likely have not hit the ATV, and it was foreseeable that by texting and being inattentive, P might collide with another vehicle, pedestrian or other obstacle. In such a jurisdiction, P's negligence would bar any recovery.
??????12

Comparative Fault (CF)?
In the majority of jurisdictions, the plaintiff's negligence would not bar recovery, but reduce the amount of damages he might be awarded based on his proportion of the fault. As discussed above, P was also negligent, so the amount of money he might recover from C would be reduced according to his level of fault in the accident. In a "pure" CF jurisdiction, P can recover even if he's 99% at fault (though he'll get only 1% of the damages he's seeking). In a modified CF jurisdiction, P's fault must not exceed 50%. If it does, he cannot recover at all.
Last Clear Chance?
If a plaintiff had the last opportunity to avoid harm by taking appropriate action, his recovery may be barred. Here P could have avoided hitting the ATV most likely had he not been focused on texting. Had he seen the ATV in time, he might have braked or swerved to avoid it. The facts are not clear on whether this might have occurred.
Conclusion: C is probably negligent in failing to stop the ATV and causing the collision with P, but P's recovery (medical expenses and property damage) will most likely be reduced due to his own carelessness.
P v. KiddieRides-R-Us (R)
Strict Liability in Torts?
Liability without fault ensues if a manufacturer, retailer, or other business involved in the selling of a particular product introduces a defective product into the stream of commerce and causes harm to a buyer, consumer, user, or even bystander.
Proper Plaintiff?
Though not a purchaser or buyer, P is a foreseeable bystander who might be harmed by the ATV (as would anyone within the immediate area of the vehicle). P is a proper plaintiff.
???13

Proper Defendant?
K is the maker of the ATV and placed the product into the stream of commerce. K is a proper defendant.
Defect?
We are told in the facts that the steering mechanism malfunctioned. If the malfunction was the result of a defect present in the ATV when it left K's hands, then K will be strictly liable. It is not clear from the facts if this is the case, however. Assuming that the ATV has not been modified and that the malfunction was not due to long term wear and tear, it is more likely than not that the defect was present when the ATV left K's plant.
Type of Defect?
There are three types of defects - manufacturing defect, design defect, and failure to adequately warn. Here, the defect is most likely one of the first two. Either this particular ATV left the assembly line with a flaw that no other units exhibited or there was a flaw in the overall design of all ATV models that could result in steering failure.
There are two tests for determining a defect: the consumer expectation test (what would the average consumer expect?) and the risk/utility test (where we ask if the cost of avoiding the risk outweighs the utility of the product). With consumer expectation, we can easily say that no consumer would expect the steering to fail on an ATV. With risk/utility, it is clear that the minor cost of making a safe steering mechanism far outweighs any utility (given that the vehicle is for recreation).
The product is most certainly defective.
Causation? (Defined above)
But for the steering defect, there would have been no collision with P. It is foreseeable that a steering defect of this sort could result in a collision with any person, vehicle, or structure in the surrounding area. Causation is satisfied.
???14

Damages? (See above)
Defenses?
Assumption of the Risk?
This is likely the only defense available to K, but K has to prove that P knew the risk, understood the risk, and voluntarily encountered it. There is no indication that P knew an ATV would come flying out of nowhere, so this defense can be quickly dismissed.
Conclusion: K can likely be found strictly liable for P's injuries/damages due to K's defective ATV.
Negligence? (Defined above)
Duty?
K will be compared with other reasonably prudent ATV manufacturers and K owes a duty of general care to avoid making products that pose an unreasonable risk of harm to foreseeable plaintiffs.
Breach?
It is quite obvious that by making an ATV with a faulty steering system, K has breached its duty. A reasonably prudent manufacturer would not allow a product with such a high risk of harm to leave its facilities.
Causation?
But for the steering defect, there would have been no collision with P. It is foreseeable that a steering defect of this sort could result in a collision with any person, vehicle or structure in the surrounding area. Causation is satisfied.
Damages?
See negligence above.
???????15

Defenses?
K can raise the same defenses that C might. See above.
Conclusion: K can likely be held liable on a theory of negligence in P's damages.
Breach of Warranty?
Express Warranty?
None was based on the facts.
Implied Warranty of Fitness for a Particular Purpose?
None was made.
Implied Warranty of Merchantability (IWOM)?
IWOM means that a particular product is suited for the purpose for which it's intended.
Here, one can assume that the ATV is suited for locomotion on streets or off-road activity like other ATVs. Part of that equation would be that the vehicle has properly working brakes, steering, acceleration, etc. The fact that the steering on this particular ATV has malfunctioned is most likely a breach of IWOM.
Privity?
Though P was not a purchaser or user of the ATV, some jurisdictions now extend privity to bystanders who suffer damages due to a breach of warranty on a particular product.
Conclusion: If in privity, P can prevail on a contractual theory of breach of warranty against K.
?????16

Question 2
Angela, Brian and Carter were at Angela's house, drinking beer. They wanted to order a pizza and have it delivered, but they did not have enough money to pay for it. Carter suggested they order the pizza and grab it from the pizza delivery person without paying. Brian told Angela to call the pizza parlor. She did so and ordered a pizza, knowing she could not pay for it. Brian and Carter waited outside the house.
When the delivery person arrived with the pizza, Carter pulled a gun out of his jacket pocket. Brian had no idea Carter was carrying a gun. Carter fired the weapon into the delivery person's vehicle but did not hit anyone. Carter told Brian to grab the pizza and run. Brian was shocked by Carter's actions and did not move. Carter turned the gun on Brian and told him, again, to grab the pizza and run. Brian then grabbed the pizza, and Carter and Brian fled the scene. Brian and Carter returned to Angela's house through the back door and all of them ate the pizza. Later, the police arrested Angela, Brian and Carter.
With what crimes, if any, can Angela, Brian and Carter reasonably be charged and what defense(s), if any, can each of them reasonably assert? Discuss.
17

Solicitation
Answer A to Question 2 People v. Carter
The crime of solicitation occurs when a party incites another to commit an unlawful act. This could be any misdemeanor, felony or breach of the peace. If the unlawful act is completed it may merge with the intended crime.
Here, the parties involved lacked the money to pay for pizza so Carter suggested to the other members to order a pizza and then take the pizza without paying for it. Taking a pizza without paying for it is stealing property which does not belong to the person trying to steal it and thus a crime. Since Carter "suggested" to the other members of the parties to steal the pizza and mere words of encouragement or even suggestion are found to be sufficient for the crime of solicitation, Carter has committed this crime.
Conspiracy
Conspiracy is an agreement between one or more parties to commit an unlawful act. The parties must have guilty minds and under the Wharton Rule a crime which must have two people to commit cannot be a conspiracy, for example adultery or duelling. Furthermore, a conspirator may be found guilty of any acts of his or her coconspirators if it is in furtherance of the conspiracy, under the Pinkerton Rule.
Here, Carter solicited the group of people to commit the crime of stealing a pizza (as discussed above), furthermore, he agreed with the other two parties to commit this act and went outside (where the crime was to take place) with the intent of stealing the pizza. His intent can be shown since he solicited the other parties. Furthermore, the act of carrying a gun, shouting commands to other parties and shooting at the victim (the delivery person) can all be seen as acts beyond mere preparation of committing the intended crime.
Carter is likely to be found guilty of conspiracy.
18

Assault
Assault is an intentional act which places a person in fear or apprehension of an immediate harmful touching. An attempted battery can also be found to be an assault, but if the battery is completed, the assault is absolved by the more serious crime of battery.
Here, Carter brandished a gun to the delivery boy to give up the pizza. It is reasonable to suspect that a gun being pointed at someone would cause them fear or apprehension of an immediate harmful result. Guns can easily put people in fear of losing their lives, so whether or not the gun was loaded or was even a real gun is likely not to help Carter out since a reasonable person would be placed in immediate apprehension of great bodily injury at the sight of a gun. Furthermore, Carter actually fired the weapon. This was likely to let the delivery person know that the gun had bullets and was in fact real. Undoubtedly, the circumstances would put fear into the delivery boy and meet the elements of assault (likely assault with a deadly weapon).
Robbery
Robbery is larceny of person by the use of intimidation or force or future harm to induce him to relinquish personal property.
Here, the delivery person was in sole and rightful possession of the pizza and it was thus his personal property. Since Carter had not paid for the pizza he had no rights to possess it. By using the gun to place fear into the delivery person's mind, Carter met the element of robbery which requires the defendant to do some action which uses force or intimidation to cause the delivery person to relinquish his lawful possession (the pizza, until it was paid for). In addition, Carter by shouting commands to Brian of what was expected to be done ("grab the pizza") met the intent element of the crime.
Larceny
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with the intent to deprive permanently.
Here, as established previously, the pizza was in the rightful ownership of the delivery person until payment was relinquished, thus transferring the right to the
19

personal property. No money was given and thus no right to the pizza existed. Carter commanded Brian to grab the pizza and thus meets the elements of larceny since the taking of something which you do not have the legal right to take can be found to be a trespassory taking and carrying away. Furthermore, the parties ate the pizza - effectively depriving the rightful owner of the pizza permanently. A jury may seek to find Carter guilty of robbery instead of larceny since it is the more serious of the crimes and all of the elements are present.
While Carter is likely to be charged with the majority of these crimes, he may want to say that he cannot be charged with larceny or burglary since the actual taking and carrying away was done by Brian; however, he was a conspirator and will be charged with any crimes that his coconspirators have committed. In addition, his act of using force is likely to render him guilty in both robbery and larceny.
Attempted Murder
Attempt is defined as an act in preparation of that if completed will result in the actual crime. Homicide at common law is defined as the (1) killing (2) of another with (3) malice aforethought. Malice aforethought can be met through four conditions: (1) an intent to kill, (2) a reckless disregard for mankind or a depraved heart/wantonness, (3) intentional infliction of great bodily injury, or (4) felony murder rule. The felony murder rule applies when during the commission of an enumerated felony a defendant commits murder. The enumerated felonies are burglary, arson, rape, kidnapping, robbery and mayhem. Since this was an attempted murder the felony murder rule will not apply. It must be shown that Carter had an intent to kill, a reckless disregard for mankind or an intentional infliction of great bodily injury.
Here, it is likely hard to prove that Carter intended to kill the delivery person or intended to inflict great bodily injury since neither of the two instances occurred. It is most likely that malice aforethought will be found through Carter's actions if he acted with a reckless disregard for mankind. Firing a gun into any inhabited vehicle or house is likely to cause injury whether the injury is intended. Regardless of whether Carter solely intended to scare the delivery person, injury from a bullet being shot into a confined area is high and probably meets the requirements of reckless disregard for humanity. The bullet could have inadvertently hit the gas tank, causing an explosion, or even hit the delivery person.
20

It is evident that if a death of the delivery person would have resulted from the bullet shot by Carter, he would be charged with murder. However, since no killing occurred the jury could see fit to find Carter guilty of attempted murder.
Defense
Voluntary Intoxication
The only defense that can likely be raised is that all three parties had been drinking beer when the crimes occurred - depending on how much beer the parties drink could establish that the parties, including Carter, could no longer establish the requisite state of mind to commit specific intent crimes. This, however, is unlikely to be a suitable defense since the plans were laid out by Carter and there was adequate timing between the planning and preparation phase to sober up. The facts do not indicate severe intoxication enough to eliminate mental understanding and the likely time between ordering a pizza and the pizza arriving is sufficient cooling off time to stop the planned crime. Finally, Carter was carrying a gun - without the knowledge of his friends. Carrying a gun over to a friend's house cannot likely be found to be a normal activity since one would generally not find a need to defend oneself or shoot anything when going over to a friend's house to drink a few beers and eat dinner. This could establish that Carter had planned criminal behavior prior to arriving at Angela's house and prior to drinking at all.
People v. Angela and Brian
Conspiracy (Defined supra)
If it can be established that Angela and Brian are coconspirators in the acts of Carter then they will be charged with any and all acts committed by Carter or each other in furtherance of the conspiracy. Angela and Brian must have both committed other acts in furtherance of the perpetration of the crime to be considered conspirators. Here, Brian told Angela to call the pizza parlor, knowing that Carter had intended to steal the pizza. Furthermore, Brian went outside to help Carter take the pizza. It can be inferred that in order to take property which is not in your lawful possession you would likely have to use some degree of force or other unlawful tactic to receive that property. This could establish the requisite intent necessary for Brian to be charged as a coconspirator in the crime spree. Finally, Brian grabbed the pizza and
21

participated in eating it. Brian is a coconspirator and will likely be charged with assault, attempted murder, robbery, and/or larceny in addition to conspiracy.
Angela, knowing that she could not pay for the pizza and knowing that an unlawful act was going to take place ordered the pizza. This is likely to be seen as an overt act since it was involved in the direct chain of events which occurred in the crime. Perhaps, it was the igniting event following the solicitation of Carter. If the jury finds that this was an overt act beyond mere preparation and into perpetration of the crime then Angela will be charged with all of the crimes of her coconspirators in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Receiving Stolen Property
A person may be found guilty of receiving stolen property if they receive the personal property of another which they know has been taken illegally and intend to deprive the rightful owner permanently.
Here, the pizza was taken with force from the rightful owner. Angela knew, prior to the pizza being taken, that the pizza would be stolen from its rightful owner. She accepted the stolen property and ate it - thus depriving the rightful owner of the property permanently. Angela can be convicted of receiving stolen property.
Defenses
Voluntary Intoxication (same as for People v. Carter) Duress
Brian will want to argue that he was placed under duress and was forced to take the pizza because Carter pulled a gun on him and demanded that he commit the crime. This was a gun that Brian was unaware of Carter carrying. This is a plausible defense but will probably not negate Brian's liability since he was a coconspirator in agreement with Carter and Angela to commit the crime in the first place. In order to take personal property of another - force would likely have to be used. Undoubtedly, Brian and Angela would know this and understand the likelihood of injury or even death.
Finally, Angela would want to argue that she had no idea of the actions going on outside of her house so she could not be guilty of the crimes committed;
22

however, if she is found to be a coconspirator then any crimes committed by the other conspirators are fair game to charge her with as long as they were in furtherance of the conspiracy. Here, the crime planned was to take a pizza - all alleged crimes were in furtherance of taking the pizza and so all parties are likely to be charged with the crime. (None of the parties made a withdrawal.)
23

Answer B to Question 2 State v. Carter
Solicitation to Commit Robbery
Solicitation is the asking or suggesting or enticing somebody else to commit an unlawful act.
Robbery is the larceny by force from a person's person.
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of tangible property of another with the intent to permanently deprive him of his property.
Here, Carter suggested to Brian and Carter [sic] that they grab the pizza from the delivery person without paying. This should be sufficient to meet the element of solicitation to commit robbery (more on robbery later).
Solicitation is a specific intent crime and will merge with the completed offence (if completed). Solicitation will merge with the completed offence, to avoid the double jeopardy clause violation.
Conspiracy to Commit Robbery
Conspiracy is the agreement to commit an unlawful act. It requires the intent to agree and the intent to commit the act. It can be implied from the facts. Here, Brian told Angela to call the pizza parlor. Angela did so and ordered pizza knowing she could not pay for it. Based on the acts of Brian and Angela, it can be concluded that an agreement has been reached between Carter, Brian, and Angela to take a pizza(s) without paying (i.e. to commit larceny or larceny by force). Even if the facts do not indicate that Brian/Angela agreed expressly, their acts indicate beyond a reasonable doubt that they agreed with Carter to commit the larceny/robbery and they had the requisite intent to do the act.
Conclusion: Carter will be charged with the conspiracy to commit robbery/larceny.
???24

Defenses
No defenses are apparent from the facts.
Robbery of Pizza Man
Robbery was defined supra. Here, Carter used a lethal weapon (a gun) and fired at the delivery person's vehicle. The use of force is proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
Carter then forced Brian (under the threat of force) to take the pizza from the van and run. Although Carter did not grab the pizza by himself, he used an instrumentality to take the pizza. (i.e., he used the threat of lethal force to get Brian to steal the pizza from the van).
From the person of another?
Here, the pizza was taken from the van, not from the delivery person. However, the courts should consider the pizza taking as a constructive taking from the person or the person's presence. This element of robbery is also met.
Trespass?
Since none of them paid for the pizza, the taking was trespassory.
Conclusion: Carter will be found guilty of the robbery of the pizza delivery person.
Defenses?
No defenses are present in the fact pattern. Carter intentionally took or forced the taking of another's property by force and without consent.
Attempted Murder of Delivery Man (person)
Attempt is a substantial step towards the commission of the unlawful act. The elements are an intent to commit the act and a substantial step towards the commission. Here, Carter fired the weapon into the delivery person's vehicle. This fact indicates that Carter did not try to scare the other person but he was
???????25

trying to actually hit the delivery guy. The firing of a lethal weapon into the vehicle will meet the State's burdens of proof of establishing an intent to murder the delivery man (person).
The substantial step was completed by just missing the person. Therefore, but for the miss, the delivery person would have been hit.
Therefore, the prima facie case for attempted murder will be established by the State. If no malice is found, then Carter could be charged with attempted involuntary manslaughter or other lesser crimes.
Defenses
Carter will claim that he did not intend to kill or shoot at the delivery person. He was only trying to scare him so that he could take the pizza without paying because he had no money. The State will argue that Carter fired the gun into the vehicle and that was a sufficient act to establish an attempted murder charge.
Attempted Felony Murder
Attempted felony murder is an attempt to kill someone during the perpetration of a dangerous felony - here, the dangerous felony is robbery of the delivery person.
The same elements as in attempted murder apply. Felony murder implies a malice and the State will argue that the malice element has been proven. The malice can also be established by intent to kill; intent to inflict great bodily harm; reckless disregard for an unjustifiable risk to the human life (depraved heart murder or willful/wanton conduct). Here, the use of the legal weapon proves intent to kill.
In summary, the State will establish malice aforethought and will also establish either attempt to commit murder; attempt to commit felony murder; or attempt to commit involuntary manslaughter.
State v. Brian Crimes of Brian
????26

Solicitation of Angela
Brian told Angela to call the pizza parlor. This is a solicitation to robbery/larceny. There are no defenses.
The crime will merge with the completed crimes of larceny, robbery, attempted murder.
Conspiracy
See under State v. Carter. Brian will be reasonably charged with conspiracy to commit larceny or robbery.
There are no defenses, as he told Angela to commit an overt act and waited outside the house with Carter, to see the delivery vehicle with the person inside.
Under the Common Law (CL) the conspiracy was complete when agreement was reached. Modernly, most jurisdictions require an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. The overt act would be the telling of Angela to call the parlor and the waiting outside the house to ambush the pizza guy. Thus, the State will establish a conspiracy, under both CL and modernly. He will be liable for all crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Robbery
The State may properly charge Brian with the robbery of the pizza person. Please see the robbery analysis under State v. Carter. The only element that it will be difficult to prove would be the force element and the taking of the tangible property with force or the threat of force.
Here, Brian will argue that it was Carter who used force by firing the gun at the pizza guy - he did not use force or threat of force. He was, however, part of the conspiracy to commit larceny/robbery and he will be charged as an accomplice to the robbery committed by Carter.
Thus, even if he did not use the actual force, he was a coconspirator and an accomplice (aided/abetted the commission of crimes) and will be liable for all crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy under the Pinkerton rule as well as modernly.
???27

Defenses
Duress:
Brian will argue that he was forced (he was under duress) by Carter to take the pizza without paying. Duress is a valid defense to a theft crime.
Abandonment:
Brian will also raise the abandonment defense that he did not know that Carter had a gun and he changed his mind when he saw Carter pulling a gun and firing at the pizza person. This defense will fail because he did not communicate the defense to the police and he did not say anything to Carter. The abandonment defense requires an effort to thwart the success of the crime. Here, he did not do that and he took the pizza. Finally, all three of them ate the pizza. This further proves that he did not abandon the conspiracy or the commission of the robbery or the other offenses.
Accessory to Attempted Murder?
The State can also charge Brian as an accessory to the attempted murder of the pizza guy. An accessory is one who aids and abets, encourages, assists, participates in the commission of a crime.
He could be charged with the attempted murder of the pizza guy under the coconspiracy theory, because he is liable for any crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Defenses
The defenses are the defenses of duress and the abandonment defense. These were discussed supra.
Conclusion: Brian could be charged with the crimes of solicitation, conspiracy, robbery, attempted murder, and larceny of the pizza (if no robbery is established by the State).
?????28

State v. Angela
Conspiracy
See Supra.
Angela did call the pizza parlor and ordered pizza knowing she could not pay for it. The agreement and the overt act are easily established. She will be found liable for all crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Accomplice Liability: See State v. Brian
Larceny of the Pizza
The eating of the pizza is the same as the sharing of the proceeds of the robbery. Thus, the State will charge her with the crimes committed by Carter and Brian - robbery, attempted murder, larceny.
Conclusion: Angela could be charged under conspiracy and accomplice theories for all the crimes discussed earlier under Brian and Carter.
?????29

Question 3
Sally decided to hold a garage sale. She posted signs in the neighborhood which read: "Giant Garage Sale - Electronic keyboard: $200 (one only), designer clothes, CD's, Books and More! Sunday, Noon to 4:00 p.m."
On Sunday, Andy saw one of Sally's signs, and arrived at her home promptly at noon. He examined the keyboard and then announced, "I'll take the keyboard for $200, but first I need to get a truck to move it home. I'll be back before 4:00 with the money and a truck." Before Sally could respond, he left.
Sally's friend, Betty, stopped by at 1:00, and saw a designer gown. Betty told Sally, "I'd love to buy that gown, but I can't afford it!" Sally replied, "I had hoped to get $400 for the gown, Betty, but you've helped me out before, and I've always wanted to pay you back. So, if I can't sell it for $400 by 3:30, the gown is yours for free." Betty thanked Sally and left.
At 1:30, Chuck browsed through the garage sale and found a set of art books. "I want to buy these," he told Sally, "but I don't have any cash with me." "That's O.K.," Sally replied. "I'll sell you those books for $100. The offer's open until 4:00." "Thanks," Chuck answered, "I'll be back as soon as I can."
At 3:30, Betty called Sally and asked if anyone had purchased the gown yet. "Not yet," Sally replied. "No one's here so I'm going to close up early. It looks like it's yours." "Thanks," Betty responded. "I am going to run to the store and buy shoes and a purse that match the gown."
At 3:45, Debbie arrived at the sale, pointed at the gown Sally had promised to Betty, and said, "I'll buy that gown for $300, and I'll buy that set of art books too." Sally sold the gown and books to Debbie.
Chuck returned before 4:00, saw Debbie carrying the books and said to Sally, "You can't sell those books to her! We had a deal!" Although he attempted to give Sally $100, she refused the money.
Betty arrived shortly thereafter, and showed Sally the shoes and purse that she had purchased to go with the gown. Sally told her the evening gown had been sold.
1. Does Andy have an enforceable contract with Sally? Discuss. 2. Does Betty have an enforceable contract with Sally? Discuss. 3. Does Chuck have an enforceable contract with Sally? Discuss.
30

Validity of Contracts
Answer A to Question 3
?The determination of whether Andy, Betty or Chuck had an enforceable contract will be based on whether a valid contract had been formed. A valid contract requires an offer, acceptance and consideration.
Governing Law
The UCC governs contracts for the sale of goods which are movable things at the time of identification to the contract. All of the items sold by Sally are movable and therefore, goods. Thus, the UCC will control.
Andy v. Sally for keyboard Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of a present contractual intent requiring definite and certain terms, communicated to the offeree.
Sally's posted signs
Sally's posted signs which stated Electric Keyboard: $200 (one only) were not an offer because it is not definite as to who the parties are. It is a solicitation for offers that invites people to come to her yard sale and negotiate with her as usually happens at yard sales.
Sally may argue that since the sign was specific in the number of keyboards for sale (1) and the price ($200) and time for acceptance (Noon to 4:00 p.m.) it contained sufficient details to be considered an offer. Further, since Andy responded to the sign by arriving promptly at noon willing to pay the $200, he showed that he believed it was an offer that was available for acceptance.
Under the UCC, which liberally construes the requirements of an offer, quantity and parties must be included for it to be an offer. Since the parties were not definite, it is not a valid offer.
????31

Andy's offer
When Andy said to Sally, "I'll take the keyboard for $200, but first I need to get a truck to move it home. I'll be back before 4:00 with the money and a truck" he showed his intent to be bound by contract under the terms he stated. There is sufficient detail in his offer because it indicated price - $200, quantity - one keyboard, parties - Andy and Sally, and time of performance - before 4:00 p.m.
This is a valid offer.
Acceptance
An acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
Here, Andy left before Sally could respond to his offer. Therefore, there has been no acceptance. Sally probably retains the power to accept until 4:00. However, she could reject the offer by selling the keyboard to someone else.
Since there has not been an acceptance, there is not an enforceable contract between Andy and Sally.
Betty v. Sally for gown Offer
Defined supra.
When Betty, a friend of Sally's stopped by and saw a gown for sale she stated "I'd love to buy the gown, but I can't afford it." This statement is not an offer because it clearly indicates that Betty does not intend to buy the gown, only wishes that she could. However, Sally's response may be considered an offer.
Sally's statement "I had hoped to get $400 for the gown, Betty, but you've helped me out before, and I've always wanted to pay you back. So if I can't sell it for $400 by 3:30, the gown is yours for free" indicates Sally's willingness to give the gown to Betty, which would show her intent to be bound. The offer cites price - free, subject matter and quantity - one gown, time for performance - 3:30 p.m. The offer contains a condition precedent - the offer is only good if Sally can't sell it for $400 by 3:30.
????32

Acceptance
Defined supra.
Betty thanked Sally for her offer, which indicates her unequivocal acceptance to the terms. Further, Sally reinforced her acceptance when she called at 3:30 to see if the dress had sold, she was told "Not yet" by Sally, indicating the condition had been satisfied.
Therefore, there is acceptance. Consideration
That which is bargained for and given in exchange for a return promise requiring benefit and detriment.
Sally will argue that her offer to give the gown to Betty for free is gratuitous and therefore, there is no consideration since she receives no benefit.
Betty will argue that the consideration for was stated by Sally - "You've helped me out before, and I've always wanted to pay you back." However, past consideration is not valid.
Therefore, there is no consideration.
Promissory Estoppel
Under promissory estoppel, a promise made by the promisor that the promisor knows will likely induce reliance by the promisee and which does include such reliance may be binding if injustice cannot be avoided otherwise.
When Betty was told by Sally over the phone that "it looks like it's (the gown) yours," Betty responded by saying "Thanks, I am going to run to the store and buy shoes and a purse that match the gown." Thus, Betty was aware that her promise to Betty had induced reliance by Betty. Betty did rely on the promise because she bought new shoes and a purse. This is detrimental reliance and is sufficient to serve as consideration.
Therefore the contract is binding.
???33

Remedies
Specific Performance
Since the gown was unique, it is possible that Betty could seek specific performance. However, that is not very practical or likely since the gown was sold to someone else.
Reliance Damages
Betty will be able to recover the cost of the shoes and purse that she purchased in reliance on Sally's promise.
General Damages
Since Sally breached her contract with Betty, Betty may seek the "benefit of her bargain," which would be value of the dress since specific performance is unlikely. However, it is more likely that she will receive only her reliance damages since the purpose of promissory estoppel is to avoid injustice.
Chuck v. Sally for art books Offer
Defined supra.
When Sally told Chuck, "I'll sell you those books (the art books) for $100," she demonstrated her present intent to be bound. The terms were definite and certain - subject matter - art books, price, $100, parties - Chuck and Sally. These terms are sufficient to be an offer under the UCC.
Therefore, there was an offer. Option?
An option is a promise supported by consideration that indicates that an offer will be held open for a specific amount of time.
???????34

Chuck will argue that Sally's offer included an option because she stated "The offer's open until 4:00." However, Chuck did not give any consideration for the option, so the option is not valid or enforceable.
Chuck may further argue that Sally is a merchant since she is selling her own possession of which she must be knowledgeable and firm offers from a merchant do not require consideration to create an option. However, Sally should not be considered a merchant for this transaction because the goods are art books and there are no facts to indicate that Sally has any expertise in art books. Owning art books does not make one an expert or knowledgeable.
Therefore, the option is not valid and Sally was able to revoke her offer at any time.
Indirect Revocation
Knowledge received by an offeree from a reliable source that the offeror does not intend to enter into the contract is an indirect revocation and ends the power of acceptance by the offeree.
Here, Chuck returned to the garage sale to see Debbie carrying the art books which Sally had sold to her. Chuck's own eyes are a reliable source and the fact that the books had been sold to Debbie indicates that Sally did not intend to make a contract with Chuck.
Thus there was a valid revocation.
Therefore, there is no enforceable contract between Chuck and Sally.
?35

Answer B to Question 3 Andy v. Sally
UCC - Uniform Commercial Code
UCC applies to all sales of movable goods. If a contract exists it will be
covered/governed by the UCC. Merchants
A merchant is one who deals in goods of that nature or holds themselves out as being knowledgeable of a certain good.
Neither party would be a merchant here. Mutual Assent
Mutual assent is required for a contract and can be demonstrated by a valid offer which is accepted before revocation or expiration.
Offer
An offer contains the required elements and is offered with the power of acceptance. Advertisements are not generally considered to be valid offers because they lack the specific elements of a valid offer.
Signs
Were the signs posted by Sally in the neighborhood considered a valid offer? Only one item contains a quantity, which was the keyboard. Nothing else has a quantity. Under the UCC quantity and parties are required in a valid contract while the other elements can be filled in using UCC gap fillers. Because this advertisement was made to all who could see it and it lacked quantity in all items except the keyboard it would likely not be considered a valid offer. Furthermore, if based upon a reasonable person's view, it would not create the power of acceptance. The one exception to this may be the keyboard.
?????36

Andy's Statement
Andy examines the keyboard and tells Sally he will "take it." If the advertisement posted in the neighborhood was a valid offer this statement could be a valid acceptance. Since the subject of the contract was the keyboard and the quantity was in the poster, Andy could have reasonably inferred his statement was an acceptance of the offer. The fact that he leaves without waiting for a reply from Sally would seem to indicate his statement was an acceptance. Andy would likely have accepted the offer made by Sally to form a contract.
Additional Terms
Andy added to his acceptance the additional term of not taking the keyboard immediately but returning for it. Under the UCC additional terms added in the acceptance will become part of the contract unless: (1) the offer prohibits new terms, (2) the terms materially alter the contract, (3) the offer[or] objects. This applies for contracts between merchants. Here, since neither party is a merchant the additional term would be viewed as an additional proposal.
Consideration
There is valid consideration for this contract of $200. Contract
If the poster is viewed as being a valid offer for the keyboard, then Andy's acceptance is valid and with consideration will form a valid contract. If the poster is not deemed to be a valid offer, then Andy's statement would be the offer which has not been accepted yet. If Andy returns and Sally accepts his payment and performs, this would form a valid acceptance and contract.
Because of the nature of the subject and the quantity in the poster and Andy's acceptance, the court would find a valid contract exists.
Betty v. Sally
UCC: supra Gown: goods Merchants: supra Neither party
?????37

Mutual Assent: supra Offer: supra
Sign: supra
The gown is not even mentioned in the sign so no valid offer would exist.
Betty's Statement
Betty says "I'd love to buy the gown but I can't afford it." There is no intent to be bound or power of acceptance in this statement. It would not be a valid offer.
Betty's Statement
Betty states she had hoped to get $400 for the gown and acknowledged that Betty has "helped me out before." She also states that if she can't sell it by 3:30 for $400 she will give it to her. It would appear this could be a valid offer if there is consideration.
Consideration
Consideration is a bargained for exchange with detriment to each party. Here Sally is giving up her gown (detriment) but is receiving nothing in return. This would be a gift. The only consideration is that of past performance where Betty had helped her out before. Past performance is not sufficient detriment for a current contract. Furthermore, Betty's past actions were not conditioned on future payment. They too, were given as a gift. There is no valid consideration for this contract and, therefore, there is no contract.
Promissory Estoppel
Promissory Estoppel occurs when the plaintiff foreseeably and detrimentally relies upon a promise. The court may enforce an invalid contract to prevent an injustice. Betty will claim she relied upon her friend's (Sally's) promise to get the gown. This is further strengthened by the fact that she called at 3:30, the time Sally promised to make the gift. Sally told Betty - no one is here - I'm closing up - the gown "looks like it is yours."
Certainly at this point it was foreseeable that Betty would rely on the promise of a gift. Betty did in fact rely upon the promise by purchasing shoes and purse. This
????38

reliance is further evident because she told Sally she was going to rely upon this promise.
Because the reliance was both foreseeable and detrimental, the court would likely enforce the contract without valid consideration.
Damages
Betty could claim reliance and general damages for breach of contract if the court enforced the contract under Promissory Estoppel.
?Chuck v. Sally
UCC: supra Merchants: supra Mutual Assent: supra Offer: supra
Sign: supra
Chuck's Statement
Art Books: Goods Neither
??Chuck states, "I want to buy these" (art books) but I don't have any cash. This would not be a valid offer but a start of negotiations. It lacks sufficient details to be a valid offer and there is no intent to be bound.
Sally's Statement
Sally says, "I'll sell those books (art books) for $100." The offer is open until 4:00 p.m. This is a valid offer because it has quantity, price, subject and parties.
Revoked
Can Sally's offer be revoked? Does she have to hold it open 'till 4:00 p.m. as she states? Because neither party is a merchant, it can only be held open if consideration is paid to hold it open, i.e., options contract. Here, there is no compensation paid to hold the offer open and therefore despite her statement to the contrary, she can revoke the offer at any time.
??39

Chuck's Statement
Chuck promises to return but does not accept the contract nor does he pay to keep the option open.
Debbie
Debbie makes a valid offer for the art books and Sally accepts. By accepting Debbie's offer she revoked Chuck's offer before acceptance.
Payment
Because there was no contract Sally did not accept the payment from Chuck when tendered.
There is no contract between Chuck and Sally.
Promissory Estoppel
If Chuck can show he foreseeably and detrimentally relied upon Sally's offer before it was revoked he may have a claim. Based upon the fact here his only reliance was to go home to get money. The courts typically seek to return a person to the position they were in prior to any agreement. Chuck's position would be unchanged and therefore there would likely be no successful claim for Promissory Estoppel.
A
jjjjjjj
a
????40

Question 4
Dede attends college with Alex, Betty, and Carl. One day, an argument that she was having with Alex, her ex-boyfriend, became heated. The argument occurred in a very crowded college lecture hall between classes. During the argument, Dede picked up a heavy textbook and threw it at Alex. Alex shielded his head with his hands and ducked. The textbook missed Alex, but it hit Betty, who was standing behind Alex. The impact fractured Betty's nose.
Enraged at missing Alex, Dede then picked up another textbook and threw it as hard as she could into a crowd of students gathered nearby. This second textbook struck Carl, who was standing in the crowd. As a result, Carl suffered a bruised rib.
What intentional tort claims, if any, do Alex, Betty, and Carl have against Dede? Discuss.
41

Throwing book 1
Assault
Answer A to Question 4 Alex v. Dede
??Assault is the volitional and intentional act of the defendant that causes the plaintiff to have reasonable apprehension of an immediate battery. Here, Dede picked up a textbook and threw it. Her act was of her own will. Intent can be shown by purpose or desire or knowledge to a substantial certainty that a result will occur. Here, since Dede was angry, it appears that her purpose was to hit Alex with the book. Under the concept of transferred intent, intent can be transferred from one tort to another or from one victim to another. Under the majority view, intent can be transferred between all intentional torts except conversion and intentional infliction of emotional distress. Under the Restatement's minority view, intent can be transferred only between assault and battery. Under Prosser's minority view, intent can be transferred between assault, battery, and false imprisonment. Here, Dede's intent to hit Alex with the book will transfer to an assault under any of these views. Additionally, Dede should know with substantial certainty that a person will have apprehension when a book is thrown at them. Here, Alex demonstrates his apprehension by shielding his head with his hands and ducking. A reasonable person would have likewise been apprehensive. Alex will establish a prima facie case for assault.
Throwing book 2
There is no evidence that Alex was affected by the second throwing of a book. Betty v. Dede
Throwing book 1
Assault (see rule above)
Per the doctrine of transferred intent (discussed above), Dede's intention to assault or batter Alex will transfer to the assault or battery of Betty. Here, Betty was standing behind Alex. The book hit Betty in the face, indicating that she was facing the book as it traveled and would thus be aware of its imminent arrival. It is unclear if Alex ducked at the last moment and thereby did not give Betty time to actually see the book. The facts do not indicate that Betty reacted in any manner prior to the book hitting her. It does not appear that Betty suffered any apprehension.
????42

Battery
Battery is the volitional and intentional act of the defendant causing a harmful or offensive touching to the plaintiff or something closely connected. Here, Dede's act was of her own free will and intent will be transferred as discussed previously. The harmful or offensive touching can be accomplished through the use of instrumentality. Here, the instrumentality is the book. Being hit in the face with a book is harmful, as evidenced by the fracture of Betty's nose, although no actual injury is required. Betty will establish a prima facie case for battery.
Carl v. Dede
Throwing book 2
Assault (see rule above)
As discussed previously, this issue will turn on whether or not Carl was able to see the book coming and thereby suffer any apprehension. The facts do not indicate that he suffered any apprehension so he will not be able to establish assault.
Battery (see rule above)
Here, Dede threw the book into a crowd. While she may have not aimed at Carl specifically, she should have known with substantial certainty that someone would be hit. Through the doctrine of transferred intent, her desire to hit (or cause someone apprehension) will transfer to the battery of Carl. Intent will be established. The book will suffice as the instrument used by Dede to accomplish the touching. Being hit with the book will suffice for the harmful or offensive touching element. Carl will establish a prima facie case for battery.
Defenses
There are no viable defenses. Remedies
Alex, Betty and Carl will be entitled to compensatory damages. These include pecuniary losses (missed time at work, medical expenses, etc.) and nonpecuniary losses (pain and suffering). Since the torts were intentional and, especially in the case of the second book thrown, may be willful and wanton conduct, they may be entitled to punitive damages as well.
???????43

Answer B to Question 4 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Intent
In order to prove an intentional tort, the parties must establish that when Dede threw the text books (1) she intended the results that occurred, or (2) the results that occurred were a substantial certainty of the actions that Dede committed. This is observed through an objective test.
Since the first element of intent (manifest acknowledgement of the intent) is hard to prove, it is unlikely that someone will volunteer culpability; the latter is usually easier to prove. Alex, Betty and Carl must all show that the results that occurred were a substantial certainty of the actions that Dede performed.
Alex v. Dede
Assault
Assault is defined as (1) an affirmative/intentional act, (2) which causes the plaintiff to be in fear or apprehension (3) of an immediate harmful touching. The plaintiff must be aware of the attempt and must be placed in the immediate fear of harm - future threats of harm will not suffice.
Here, Dede threw a book at Alex. College textbooks are not small or light for the most part and a reasonable person would likely be scared of the result of a heavy textbook hitting them. The facts indicate that the throwing of the book was a result of a heated argument which makes the likelihood that the force of the throw was quite strong and could result in a detrimental blow. Alex's fear and apprehension can further be evidenced by his shielding his head and ducking to avoid getting hit by the book. This would be a normal and expected reaction of someone who fears injury from a heavy object being launched at him. Furthermore, given the fact that they were well acquainted (ex-lovers) they were likely not too far away from each other, which would result in an even more serious impact.
Since a reasonable person would block a book from hitting them it is likely that Alex was placed in fear of an immediate harmful touching and that since throwing a heavy textbook at a person is a substantial certainty to cause the person fear, Dede is likely to be liable for assault of Alex. Since there was no harmful touching (the book actually hit someone else) a battery would not apply.
???44

Betty v. Dede
Battery
Battery is defined as (1) an affirmative/intentional act (2) which results in a harmful touching.
Here, Betty must show that Dede intended to hit her with the textbook. This is difficult since Dede was having a heated argument with Alex and likely intended that injury occur to him instead of Betty. However, in tort law there exists transferred intent where as long as the defendant had the requisite intent to injure one party or commit a tort against one party it can be transferred to another party that actually received the tort. This is likely to apply in the case of Betty v. Dede since as established in the assault claim under Alex v. Dede - Dede intentionally threw the textbook at Alex to cause injury - the fact that it hit Betty does not eliminate the intent - only transfers it. Betty is a likely transferred intent victim since Dede threw the textbook in a crowded college lecture hall where students are busily trying to move from one class to the next and not likely to be able to react quickly enough to duck an unexpected flying book from hitting them. Since Dede transferred the intent the first element of battery is met and since the textbook resulted in a fractured nose the second element of a harmful touching is met.
Assault
Betty may have a claim against Dede for assault (as defined above), but if she did not see the book prior to it hitting her then she could not be placed in immediate fear or apprehension of the harm occurring - so there would be no intentional tort of assault.
Carl v. Dede
Battery (defined supra)
Carl must prove that Dede operated with the requisite intent to cause the harm that resulted (his bruised rib). While it is doubtful that Dede intended to strike Carl personally, her action of throwing a second textbook into a crowd of students is substantially certain to cause at least one of those students harm. This element of substantial certainty meets the second requirement of intent under the definition. Hurling anything into a crowd - even a pencil is likely to cause damage - something as large as a textbook could result in serious bodily injury. Finally, Carl must show that his bruised rib was a harmful touching. Undoubtedly, a rib injury due to a hurled object is going to be seen as an objective, harmful touching.
?????45

Assault - see Betty v. Dede
Defenses
While it is unlikely that the normal defenses of consent, defense of others, defense of property, self-defense, necessity or arrest will apply to the torts committed by Dede, she may want to argue that an ordinary, reasonable person who was in a heated argument with her boyfriend would react in a like or similar circumstance. It is doubtful that any jurors would accept this plea since no matter how angry a person gets it is not reasonable to throw a potentially dangerous object into a crowded room out of anger.
Dede will likely be responsible for all damages that resulted from her actions. The damages were a direct result of Dede's actions and thus the causation element is met.
?46


???????California First-Year Law Students' Examination
?????????Essay Questions
October 2008
???????1

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2008 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2008 California First-Year Law Students? Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page 3.
??Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject Page 
Contracts 4 
Torts 12 
Criminal Law 28 
Contracts 37
???2

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?3

Question 1
Abby and Paula entered into a valid contract under which Abby agreed to buy and Paula agreed to sell for $1.5 million a printing press for Abby?s business. Abby made a $500,000 payment to Paula at the time of the sale and agreed to make the final payment of $1 million in six months.
Just prior to the date the final payment was due, Abby sold her business, including the press, to Bert. As part of the sale, Bert agreed with Abby to pay Paula the $1 million due her. Abby represented in the purchase agreement between Abby and Bert that all of the business equipment was in working order, although she knew that the press never functioned as it was intended to. In fact, Abby had previously requested of Paula that she repair or replace the press, but Paula had refused to do so.
After Bert bought the business he discovered the problem with the press. He told Paula that he would not pay her the $1 million due until she repaired or replaced the press. Paula immediately filed a breach of contract lawsuit against Bert for the outstanding $1 million balance. Bert denies any obligation to pay Paula the $1 million on the basis that he had never entered into any contract with Paula.
In addition, Bert asserts two other defenses: First, that the printing press is defective and unsuitable for its intended purpose. Second, that Abby materially misrepresented the condition of the press.
1. Under what theory or theories may Paula be successful in her breach of contract action against Bert? Discuss.
2. What is the likelihood that the additional defenses asserted by Bert will prevail? Discuss.
4

Answer A to Question 1
Abby and Paula entered into a valid contract. This removes formation issues of offer, acceptance and consideration from issue.
This is a contract for goods and UCC applies. A "good" is personal property that is moveable at the time of the sale. Here, the property is a $1.5M printing press which was movable to Abby?s place and is, therefore, a "good".
Paula as a seller of printing presses and Abby as a business owner in need of a $1.5M printing press can both be assumed to be Merchants based on special knowledge and/or experience in performing the duties of selling presses or printing. Merchants have a higher duty of "fair dealing" which becomes important in the defense to the breach action based on the faulty press (see Bert?s Defenses infra).
1st call: Under what theory or theories may Paula be successful in her breach of contract action against Bert?
Paula v. Bert:
Paula is a 3rd party beneficiary under the contract between Abby and Bert (discussed below). She may sue Bert for breach under her rights as the 3rd party beneficiary.
She also has the right to demand assurance of payment from Bert as the delegatee of Abby?s duty. Here, we also find that Bert repudiated the contract duty to pay Paula when he indicated: "He [Bert] told Paula that he would not pay her the $1M due until she repaired or replaced the press." When this occurred, Paula did not have to wait for a specific time of performance but was able to bring an action for breach immediately upon such anticipatory repudiation.
Each theory that Paula uses depends on whether there was a valid delegation of the duty to pay to Bert and, therefore, the creation of rights in Paula as a 3rd party beneficiary. These two issues are now discussed below:
Delegation:
Definition: A delegation occurs when duties under an existing valid
contract are passed over to a third party. In order for this to be effective the following must be considered:
Was the duty delegatable: The courts do not favor delegation but certain duties are delegatable if they are not too personal to the contract. Here, the duty delegated was payment of money which is not considered too personal. There is no indication that the contract between Paula and Abby contained any clause prohibiting delegation.
????5

Duty is delegatable.
Did Bert assume the duty: When "Bert agreed with Abby to pay Paula the $1M due to her" he assumed the duty that had been delegated.
Effect of Delegation: When a duty is delegatable and has been assumed, it places the delegatee in the shoes of the delegator. Here, Bert assumed the duties of Abby-"stepping into Abby?s shoes". Thus, if Abby owed Paula $1M then Bert now owed Paula $1M.
Novation: A novation is an agreement among all of the parties to an agreement that an assignment and/or delegation of rights/duties is acceptable. Here, that would require that Paula agreed in advance to the delegation. Here, there is no indication of such agreement by Paula so there is no Novation.
Defenses: Bert has a defense to the contract he formed with Abby based on misrepresentation which may void that contract and eliminate his responsibilities to Paula (discussed infra under heading "Bert's Defenses").
3rd Party Beneficiary:
Definition: A third-party beneficiary is one who receives rights or a benefit through a contract between two or more other parties who, while forming the contract, intended to benefit the 3rd party. Here, Paula became a third-party beneficiary at the time that Abby sold her business to Bert and placed into the contract with Bert the delegation of the duty to pay Paula the $1M owed as the balloon payment for the printing press. When this delegation was placed into the contract (represented in the purchase agreement between Abby and Bert) and Bert agreed to pay it manifests present intent to benefit Paula. Paula is, therefore, a 3rd Party Beneficiary.
Privity: Normally, only those in privity have rights within a contract. However, Lawrence v Fox determined that, in the case of third-party beneficiaries, privity is not required. Paula, therefore, has rights if other elements are met under this contract.
Intent of contracting parties: In order for Paula to have rights there must have been present intent on Abby and Bert?s part. Discussed supra.
Classification of 3rd party beneficiary: Whether one is an intended beneficiary (RSt.) which is a Creditor or Donee beneficiary or if one is merely an incidental beneficiary affects the rights of the 3rd party. Here, because Bert assumed a duty to pay a debt owed to Paula, Paula is a Creditor Beneficiary (an Intended Beneficiary). This gives her strong contractual rights if she is vested.
Vesting: In order for a 3rd Party to be able to enforce any potential rights under a contract for which they became the 3rd P Beneficiary, they must first be vested. Typically, for creditor beneficiaries vesting occurs on notice (some jurisdictions notice and assent). Here, the facts do not provide much information about notice but one may assume notice had been made by the statement: "He [Bert] told Paula that he would not pay her the $1.5M due until she repaired or replaced the press"; and by the fact that "Paula immediately filed a breach of contract lawsuit against Bert". Paula?s rights would be considered vested.
??6

Therefore, Paula could be successful in her action for breach against Bert absent any valid defenses.
Call #2: Bert's additional Defenses - likelihood Bert will Prevail?
Bert has two significant defenses he may raise:
That the printing press is defective and unsuitable for its intended
purpose; and That Abby misrepresented the condition of the press when he and she entered into their contract.
Each will be discussed in turn:
Defective Press: Bert, by stepping into the shoes of Abby, may assert all defenses against Paula that Abby could assert. Here, Abby had informed Paula previously that "the press never functioned as it was intended to"; and "had previously requested of Paula that she repair or replace the press, but Paula had refused to do so". Paula, as a Merchant, has a higher duty of fair dealing. Between Merchants there is an implied warranty of fitness for the intended use. Here, Abby could reasonably expect that a $1.5M printing press would operate as it was intended to do. Here, the press "never did". This implies that right from the start, the good delivered was defective. When the contract is for a specific good such as this, it must perfectly conform or the buyer has a right to reject it (Perfect Tender Rule). Here, Abby informed Paula that it was defective and demanded assurance that it would be repaired or replaced. Paula?s refusal to do so is a breach of contract. Bert may assert this same defense against Paula and is likely to prevail.
Misrepresentation: Paula only has an action against Bert if there is a valid contract between Bert and Abby as her rights are derivative as a third-party beneficiary. Here, Bert may argue that Abby?s material misrepresentation of the status of the equipment is a valid defense to contract formation between them. Here, Abby put in the purchase order that "all of the equipment was in working order" despite the fact that "she knew the press did not function as it was intended to". Bert should prevail against Abby, which will extinguish Paula?s rights against him [Paula may still sue Abby.]
??7

Paula v. Bert
UCC
Answer B to Question 1
The transaction involves a dealing amongst merchants and a printing press which is considered goods under UCC.
Goods
UCC requires that goods be identified, be present and existing, before an interest in them can pass.
Here, the printing press is present and existing.
Merchants
Merchants are those who hold themselves out as having special knowledge and skill and are required to act in good faith.
Here, all the parties are merchants, Paula is a merchant who sold the printing press, Abby is the merchant who initially purchased the printing press, and Bert was the merchant who thereafter assumed the printing press when he purchased Paula?s business.
Offer
Unlike common law, where the offer is the outward manifestation of present contractual intent definite and certain in terms and communicated to offeree, the UCC only requires the quantity to be evidenced, where in this case is one printing press.
Acceptance
Unlike common law, where acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer, under UCC acceptance may be promise of shipment, the act of shipment or shipment with notice. In this case Abby?s initial acceptance was evidenced by the printing press receipt confirmation.
Consideration
Unlike common law, where the consideration is that which is bargained for and given in exchange of a return promise or act and which requires legal detriment, under UCC an offer made by a merchant is sufficient without consideration for
8

time stated, reasonable time, but in no event longer than three months, known as the firm offer rule.
Valid Contract
Having said that and provided by the facts, a valid contract exists under which Abby agreed to buy and Paula agreed to sell for $1.5 million a printing press for Abby?s business.
Assignment
An assignment is when a party to a contract intentionally releases him/her self from any rights under the contract and instead creates these rights under a third- party. Privity is not required, though the rights must be assignable and vested in the third party.
The facts provide that as part of the sale, Bert agreed with Abby to pay Paula the $1 million due her. Not considering the effect of the work "with" which could still keep Abby liable, Abby may have successfully assigned her agreement with Paula to Bert in the sales contract of her business. Since privity is not required and since the rights are not too personal or prohibited by the contract, thus are assignable. The rights vested in Bert when Bert agreed to pay Paula the $1 million and its effect is that Bert replaces Abby in the contract between Abby and Paula.
Thus, Abby assigned the rights to the printing press.
Delegation
A delegation of duties is possible where it?s not prohibited by contract nor it is too personal.
Provided that the facts do not indicate that any delegation is against the contract, and since the duties are not too personal, Abby did successfully delegate her duties to pay for the printing press to Bert.
The effect of the assignment, which is the right to the printing press and the delegation to pay for the printing press via the sales contract executed by Abby and Bert, makes Paula the third-party beneficiary.
Third-Party Beneficiary
Third-party beneficiary is identified at the outset of the agreement, unlike assignment or delegation. Privity is not required, only the intention of the parties when executing the agreement to be in the benefit of the third-party beneficiary.
9

In this case, the third-party beneficiary is Paula, [to] whom the rights vest according to majority with notice and assent, according to minority upon reliance.
Thus, Paula is the intended third-party beneficiary creditor since a debt is due her for the printing press.
The establishment of the third-party beneficiary via assignment and delegation thus creates the contractual obligation between Bert and Paula. The effect of the delegation on Abby is that she will still be secondarily liable for the $1 million due Paula for the printing press. However, having found the contractual link amongst Bert and Paula, Bert will owe Paula the $1 million.
Breach
Anticipatory repudiation
Paula will assert that when Bert denied any obligation to pay Paula the $1 million on the basis that he never entered into any contract with Paula, that Bert breached his duty to pay.
Damages
Paula is entitled to the $1 million, however must correct the issues with the printing press (infra) under warranty.
Warranty - Defense asserted by Bert
Express warranty is expressly stated in the contract. In this case the facts do not support the finding of such warranty.
Implied warranty is implied in law from seller (Paula) to buyer (Bert).
Implied warranty of merchantability is when the seller represents that the goods are of fair and average quality for normal use.
Implied warranty of fitness is when the seller knows of the buyer?s intended use and the buyer justifiably relies on the seller?s knowledge and skills.
It can be said that Paula is liable for the defects of the printing press, which is limiting it from performing just as a fair and average printing press during normal use. Further, it can also be argued that Paula knew the buyer?s intended use and the buyer relied on her special skills and knowledge regarding the printing press and its functions.
10

Misrepresentation of the condition of the press by Abby - Defense asserted by Bert
This claim by Bert will be successful against Abby and not in defense to the case brought by Paula.
Bert may argue that Abby intentionally misrepresented material facts regarding the functioning of the printing press, knowing it would induce Bert?s reliance, to which he did.
Bert will be able to recover any out-of-pocket damages against Abby.
However, as mentioned, Bert must pay the $1 million and Paula must fix the issues with the printing press.
Perfect Tender Rule
Perfect tender rule mentions that in the event of nonconforming goods, the buyer may reject or accept all or portion.
Single Unit
Since the printing press is a single unit, perfect tender rule may only apply in the event the singly [sic] unless it has an extreme effect on the contract in its entirely.
Acceptance
An acceptance under UCC can be by any of the following: acceptance after inspection, failure to reject, or the use of the goods. Provided that Abby was the initial party who did use the printing press and did not reject within reasonable time, it can be stated that there was sufficient acceptance by Abby. However, had she not used the printing press and had she notified Paula within reasonable time she could have rejected the printing press.
11

Question 2
Alice operates a daycare center in her home from Monday through Friday for children from ages 6 months to three years old. One Friday, she discovered some mice in her house and called Bob, an exterminator. She told Bob that she runs the daycare center in her home for very young children and needs to get rid of the mice by the following Monday, when the children will return.
On Saturday, Bob placed small plastic packages of poison pellets in the corners of every room in the house. He explained that the mice would gnaw through the plastic packaging to eat the pellets, and then die shortly thereafter. On each package was printed the following warning:
"DANGER: THIS PACKAGE CONTAINS POISION, WHICH MAY BE HARMFUL TO HUMAN HEALTH IF SWALLOWED!"
Before leaving Alice?s house, Bob told her that the mice should ingest the pellets by Monday morning and that she could if she wanted to remove what is left of the packages before the children arrived.
On Sunday, Carol came for the first time to clean Alice?s house. Carol did not know that Alice operated a daycare center in her home. Carol noticed several packages of poison in the corners of the rooms, but cleaned around them.
Shortly before the children arrived on Monday morning, Alice removed as many of the packages of poison as she could find. Later that day, nine-month-old Victor, one of the children in Alice?s daycare center, was crawling along the floor of the living room when he found a package that Alice had missed. It had already been gnawed into by a mouse, and Victor reached in and ate some of the pellets. He became seriously ill. Medical tests determined that Victor?s illness was caused by his ingestion of the mouse poison.
Under what theory or theories might Victor?s parents bring an action for damages against Alice, Bob and Carol? Discuss.
What defenses, if any, might Alice, Bob and Carol assert, and what is the likely result? Discuss.
12

VICTOR V. ALICE
Answer A to Question 2
NEGLIGENCE
Negligence is the failure to conform to a standard of care, the breach of which is the actual and proximate cause of plaintiff?s damages.
DUTY
A duty is owed to all foreseeable plaintiffs. Foreseeability is determined through the Cardozo and Andrews tests. Under Cardozo, a duty is owed to foreseeable plaintiffs in the "zone of danger" whereas, under Andrews, a duty is owed to all.
Under the Cardozo view, Victor is a foreseeable plaintiff because he is [a] child in Alice?s daycare, the zone of danger.
Under the Andrews view, Victor is owed a duty. Therefore, a duty is owed to Victor by Alice.
STANDARD OF CARE
The standard of care owed is to act as a reasonably prudent person. However, landowners have a higher duty of care depending on the classification of the individual on the landowner?s land.
LICENSEE/INVITEE?
A licensee is a person invited on the landowner?s land for a benefit of their own whereas an invitee is invited on the landowner?s land for the benefit of the landowner.
Here, Victor is on Alice?s land for Alice?s care, which may constitute Victor as a licensee. However, Alice runs a daycare business to which Victor?s presence is also a benefit to Alice.
Therefore, Victor is an invitee.
STANDARD OF CARE OWED TO INVITEE
The standard of care owed by a landowner to an invitee is to warn of known dangerous defects and make reasonable inspections to discover defects that could potentially pose as a dangerous condition.
Therefore, a standard of care exists.
BREACH OF DUTY
A breach occurs when defendant?s conduct falls below the standard of care owed to plaintiff.
????13

Here, Alice was aware that poisons were placed in the corner of her home and she failed to pick them all up as the facts state that she "picked up only what she could find." Alice will argue that she took reasonable care in collecting all of the poison packets. Victor?s parents will argue that Alice could have exercised reasonable care by contacting Bob the exterminator to account for all the poison packets. Alice did not exercise reasonable care by warning Victor?s parents or the parents of the other children that poison packets were present in her home to fix the mouse problem and the packets were a known dangerous condition. Further, if Alice was not sure that she had picked up all of the packets, she had knowledge that the packets were placed in the corners of the house and that she could have kept Victor and the children away from the corners to avoid potential injury.
CAUSATION
The defendant?s acts must be the actual and proximate cause of plaintiff?s injuries.
ACTUAL CAUSE (CAUSE IN FACT)
Actual cause is determined when plaintiff would not have been injured "but for" defendant?s acts.
Here, "but for" Alice?s failing to pick up all the poison packets, Victor would not have been injured.
Therefore, there is actual causation.
PROXIMATE CAUSE (LEGAL CAUSE)
Proximate cause is determined when the injury to plaintiff was a foreseeable result of defendant?s acts with no intervening causes.
Here, it is foreseeable that if the poison packets were not completely collected in a house full of young children that a child could possibly obtain possession of them and put the poison in their mouth. The facts do not indicate any intervening causes to break the chain of causation.
Therefore, there is proximate causation.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE DOCTRINE
Under the attractive nuisance doctrine, a landowner is liable for the injury of a person on his land if 1) a dangerous condition was present, 2) the landowner was aware of the dangerous condition, 3) the landowner was aware of the frequency of children on his property, 4) landowner was aware that the children on the property would not appreciate the danger because of their incapacity.
????14

Here, Alice was aware that the poison packets were placed in her home because of her request for the exterminator to kill the mice, which satisfies the element of a dangerous condition was present.
Here, Alice was aware that the poison packets were dangerous because they were strong enough to kill the mice and the warning on the front that states it is "harmful to human health if swallowed."
Here, Alice operated a child daycare center, which means that she was aware that children were frequently on her property.
Here, the children that Alice cared for were between the ages 6 months to 3 years old, which means that they most likely would not appreciate the danger from the presence of a packet that contained poison.
Therefore, Alice is liable under the Attractive Nuisance Doctrine.
DAMAGES
Damages are the physical injuries suffered by the plaintiff.
Here, Victor became seriously ill due to the ingestion of the poison packets.
Therefore, the damage element is satisfied.
REMEDIES
Plaintiff is entitled to general and special damages for the injuries caused by defendant.
Here, Victor is entitled to medical expenses incurred (special damages) and any present and future pain and suffering (general damages).
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
A plaintiff is contributorily negligent if his own negligence contributed to his own injuries. If a plaintiff is found contributorily negligent he will be completely barred from recovery.
Here, Victor was nine months old and because of his young age he is presumed to lack the capacity to be negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
15

COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
A plaintiff is comparatively negligent if his own negligence contributed to his own injuries. In a pure comparative negligence state, a negligent plaintiff may recover no matter how high his negligence is in comparison to defendant?s. However, in a modified negligence state, a negligent plaintiff can only recover if he is 49% negligent or less.
Here, Victor was nine months old and because of his young age he is presumed to lack the capacity to be negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
A plaintiff has assumed the risk if he 1) was aware of the dangerous risk, and 2) appreciates the dangers of the risk, 3) voluntarily encounters the risk.
Here, Victor was nine months old and because of his young age he is presumed to lack the capacity to be negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY
When there exists several negligent persons contributing to the injury sustained by plaintiff, each defendant will be held jointly and severally liable for the total amount of plaintiff?s injuries.
Here, Alice will argue that Bob the Exterminator was also negligent (see infra) and that he should be held jointly and severally liable for Victor?s injuries.
CONTRIBUTION
If Alice compensates Victor for the full amount of his damages Alice may see contribution from Bob for the damages since Bob?s negligent act contributed to Victor?s injuries.
VICTOR V. BOB
NEGLIGENCE
DUTY
A duty is owed to all foreseeable plaintiffs.
16

A duty is owed to all foreseeable plaintiffs. Foreseeability is determined through the Cardozo and Andrews tests. Under Cardozo, a duty is owed to foreseeable plaintiffs in the "zone of danger" whereas, under Andrews, a duty is owed to all.
Under the Cardozo view, Victor is a foreseeable plaintiff because he is [a] child in Alice?s daycare, the zone of danger where Bob placed the poison.
Under the Andrews view, Victor is owed a duty.
Therefore, a duty is owed to Victor by Bob.
STANDARD OF CARE
A professional owes a higher standard of care comparable to other professionals with similar experience and education in the same localities.
Here, Bob is considered a professional because he is an exterminator in the profession of exterminating mice.
Therefore, Bob owes a standard of care in comparison with comparable exterminators.
BREACH
See Supra.
Here, Bob breached his duty by not informing Alice of the amount of poison packets that he had placed or coming back the following Monday to remove the packets himself. In addition, he informed Alice that she could pick up the poison packets "if she wanted," implying that the packets did not pose an immediate danger, since he did not emphasize immediate removal. Further, Bob knew that children are frequently in Alice?s home because Alice told Bob that she ran a daycare for very young children, and for that reason Bob could have placed the packets in areas of the home that cannot be accessed by children.
Therefore, Bob breached his duty.
CAUSATION
ACTUAL CAUSE
See Supra.
"BUT FOR" Bob placing the poison packets in the corners of Alice?s, easily accessible to Victor, Victor would not have eaten the pellets and gotten ill.
?17

PROXIMATE CAUSE
See Supra.
It is reasonably foreseeable that placing poison packets in an area where young children can access them would result in injury.
INTERVENING CAUSE
Bob will argue that the hole gnawed by the mouse was an intervening cause, but that result was foreseeable and does not break the chain of causation.
Therefore, Bob is the actual and proximate cause of Victor?s injuries.
DAMAGES
Damages are the physical injuries suffered by the plaintiff.
Here, Victor became seriously ill due to the ingestion of the poison packets.
Therefore, the damage element is satisfied.
REMEDIES
Plaintiff is entitled to general and special damages for the injuries caused by defendant.
Here, Victor is entitled to medical expenses incurred (special damages) and any present and future pain and suffering (general damages).
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
A plaintiff is contributorily negligent if his own negligence contributed to his own injuries. If a plaintiff is found contributorily negligent he will be completely barred from recovery.
Here, Victor was nine months old and because of his young age he is presumed to lack the capacity to be negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
18

COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
A plaintiff is comparatively negligent if his own negligence contributed to his own injuries. In a pure comparative negligence state, a negligent plaintiff may recover no matter how high his negligence is in comparison to defendant?s. However, in a modified negligence state, a negligent plaintiff can only recover if he is 49% negligent or less.
Here, Victor was nine months old and because of his young age he is presumed to lack the capacity to be negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
A plaintiff has assumed the risk if he 1) was aware of the dangerous risk, and 2) appreciates the dangers of the risk, 3) voluntarily encounters the risk.
Here, Victor was nine months old and because of his young age he is presumed to lack the capacity to be negligent.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY
When there exists several negligent persons contributing to the injury sustained by plaintiff, each defendant will be held jointly and severally liable for the total amount of plaintiff?s injuries.
Here, Bob will argue that Alice was also negligent (see supra) and that she should be held jointly and severally liable for Victor?s injuries.
CONTRIBUTION
If Bob compensates Victor for the full amount of his damages Bob may seek contribution from Alice for the damages since Alice?s negligent act contributed to Victor?s injuries.
VICTOR V. CAROL NEGLIGENCE
See Supra.
19

DUTY
See Supra.
Here, Victor is not a foreseeable plaintiff and Carol does not owe Victor a duty because the facts state that she had come to Alice?s house for the first time and that she was unaware that the home was used for a daycare. Although she noticed the poisons present in the rooms, Carol will argue that she was there to clean the home and that she believed that Alice placed the packets there for a purpose unknown to her.
Therefore, no duty is owed.
INDEMNIFICATION
Carol may seek indemnification as she was not liable for the injuries sustained by Victor.
20

VICTOR v. ALICE
Answer B to Question 2
?Is Alice liable for NEGLIGENCE?
Negligence is when there is a duty owed and the breach of that duty is the factual and proximate cause of plaintiff?s damages.
DUTY
One has the duty to act with a standard of reasonable care.
Here, Alice has the duty to make sure the premise of her house is reasonably safe as a professional who runs a daycare center, i.e., no poisonous rat pellets laying around for children to ingest.
Therefore, Alice has a general duty.
LANDOWNER?S DUTY
Landowner has the duty to inspect any discoverable dangers and to fix the dangers.
Since this is Alice?s home, she has the landowner?s duty to remove all poison pellet packages to avoid any harm done.
Therefore, Alice has a duty as a landowner.
DUTY TO AN INVITEE
One has a duty to their invitee to warn of dangers, inspect any discoverable dangers, and to fix the dangers.
Victor is an invitee to Alice?s home because Victor is there for the purpose of Alice?s supervision. Therefore, Alice has the duty to warn Victor (and his parents) of the poisonous pellet packages that were placed in the house as well as to find all the packages remaining and remove all the remaining packages.
Therefore, Alice has a duty to Victor as an invitee.
BREACH OF DUTY
Breach of duty is when the defendant fails to perform his/her duty of standard of reasonable care.
Alice breached her duty because she failed to pick up all the packages of poison in her home. Alice will argue that she did not breach her duty, because she picked up all the ones she could find. However, she did not make an effort to know exactly how many packets there were or where all the packets were by asking Bob so that she can ensure that she gets all of them.
?????21

Alice may argue that [sic]. Therefore, Alice breached her duty.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE DOCTRINE
Under the attractive nuisance doctrine, if the defendant knows that there is danger that will potentially attract children, the defendant has the duty to keep children away from the danger.
Alice, as a daycare professional for children between 6 months to three years old should know that children at young ages tend to put things they find in their mouths. Since poison pellets probably look like candy to children, Alice needs to take an extra step of care to make sure there are absolutely no leftover poisonous packages laying around and that children get access [to] those packages.
FACTUAL CAUSE
Factual cause is the cause that sets the following acts in motion, withstanding the "but for" and "substantial certainty" tests.
"But for" Alice not picking up all of the packages of poisons, Victor would not have ingested the poison and become ill. It is also "substantially certain" that if she does not pick up all the poisonous packages that children may think it is okay for them to ingest and become ill.
Therefore, Alice is the factual cause.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause is the factual cause, notwithstanding an unforeseeable independent and intervening act.
It is foreseeable that if Alice leaves poisonous rat pellets around her house, in which she operates her daycare from, that children may find them and eat them and become injured. Alice may argue that there are intervening causes, such as Carol coming to clean her house and not picking up the packages and Bob was the one who actually placed the packages around her house.
However, those are not independent intervening causes Carol is only hired to clean her house and not to rearrange or remove items from her house and Bob was there to place the poison there by Alice?s request.
Therefore, Alice is the proximate cause.
DAMAGES
Damages are the injuries and/or other losses that the plaintiff suffered as a result of the defendant?s negligence.
????22

Here, due to Alice?s negligence, Victor became seriously ill from eating the pellets.
CONCLUSION TO NEGLIGENCE
As discussed above, Alice had the duty towards Victor to act with standard of reasonable care and the breach of that duty was the factual and proximate cause of Victor?s damages. Therefore, Alice is liable for negligence.
DEFENSES - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Under contributory negligence, if the plaintiff?s own negligence contributed to his injuries, he is barred from recovering for damages against the defendant.
Alice will assert that because Victor was the one who found the package and ate the pellets, that Victor is contributorily negligent to his own injuries.
This defense will fail because Victor is only 9 months old and is too young to know that the pellets are dangerous and will contribute to his own injuries.
DEFENSE - ASSUMPTION OF RISK
Under assumption of risk, if the plaintiff knows and appreciated the dangers that were involved and participated in the danger anyway, he assumes the risk involved.
Alice will assert that Victor should have known that the pellets are dangerous and assumed the risk of eating them anyway.
This defense will fail because, as discussed supra, Victor is 9 months old and is too young to know and appreciated the dangers involved with ingesting rat poison.
VICTOR V. BOB
Is Bob Liable For NEGLIGENCE?
Negligence as defined supra. DUTY
Duty as defined supra.
Bob has the duty to ensure that his customers (i.e., Alice) is aware that the pellet packages must be picked up or else because it is harmful to someone who ingests it. He also has the duty to make sure that the packages are discarded properly because he is in the business as an exterminator and should know that if packages are not discarded properly that it is harmful to someone who ingests it.
??????23

Therefore, Bob has a duty.
BREACH OF DUTY
Breach of duty as defined supra.
Bob breached his duty because he did not emphasize the need to ensure all remaining packages are removed before the children arrived.
Bob will argue that he told Alice that she could remove the packages from the premises and also that on each of the packages there is a warning sign printed on it about how it is harmful to humans if swallowed. However, as evidenced by the facts, he only told Alice that the mice should ingest the pellets by Monday morning and if she wanted to remove the remaining packages, he is not informing Alice the importance of removing the packages and also by saying "if", he gave her an option to choose whether or not to remove the packages, thus implying that the packages may not be that dangerous.
Therefore, Bob has breached his duty. FACTUAL CAUSE
Factual cause as defined in supra.
"But for" Bob not requiring and emphasizing to Alice to pick up all the packages, Alice would have ensured to pick up all the packages. Since Alice did not pick up all the packages, Victor ingested the pellets. Also, it [is] "substantially certain" that if all the packages are not picked up, that someone may get hurt from ingesting the poison.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause as defined above.
Here, it is foreseeable that if Bob did not either return to pick up all the packages or instruct Alice that she must pick up all the packages, it is foreseeable that young children can be hurt by ingesting it since Bob knew Alice ran a daycare center in her home for very young children.
Bob will argue that Alice is the independent intervening cause because she should have picked up all of the packages, and if she did, Victor would not have been hurt. However, as discussed above, Bob should have emphasized and required that Alice pick up all the packages, instead of giving her an option to do so. Therefore, Alice is not an independent and intervening cause and thus not breaking the chain of causation.
???24

Therefore, Bob is the proximate cause. DAMAGES
Damages discussed and defined supra.
CONCLUSION TO NEGLIGENCE
As discussed above, Bob had the duty towards Victor to act with [a] standard of reasonable care and the breach of that duty was the factual and proximate cause of Victor?s damages.
Therefore, Alice is liable for negligence.
DEFENSES - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Defined and discussed above.
This defense will fail for Bob as well for the same reasons it will fail for Alice. DEFENSE - ASSUMPTION OF RISK
Defined and discussed above.
This defense will fail for Bob as well for the same reasons it will fail for Alice. VICTOR V. CAROL
Is Carol Liable for NEGLIGENCE
Negligence as defined supra.
DUTY
Duty as defined supra.
Carol is hired by Alice to clean Alice?s house. Carol has the duty to clean Alice?s house with [the] duty of a professional and ensure that after the cleaning of the house that there are no dangers that she left behind.
Carol does not have the duty to make sure she removes any dangerous items from Alice?s home (i.e., the rat poison) that Carol, herself, did not place there. Victor will argue that she does have a duty because she saw the packages and cleaned around them. However, there are no facts that indicate that she knew what those packages were when she was cleaning.
Therefore, it will depend on what the court finds whether Carol has a duty or not. 25
???????
BREACH OF DUTY
Breach of duty as defined supra.
If the courts do find that Carol had a duty towards Victor, Victor will argue that Carol breached her duty because she didn?t pick up the packages when she saw them.
Therefore, Carol has breached her duty. FACTUAL CAUSE
Factual cause as defined supra.
"But for" Carol not picking up the packages of poison, Victor would not have had a chance to ingest it. It is also substantially certain that if poison is ingested by someone, they can become injured.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause as defined above.
Under Judge Cardozo?s proximate cause, defendant is only liable for damages caused to plaintiffs within the foreseeable zone of danger. Carol will argue that Victor is not within the foreseeable zone of danger because she had no knowledge that Alice operated a daycare facility.
Under Judge Andrews? proximate cause, defendant is liable for damages caused to all plaintiffs. Victor will argue that under Judge Andrews? proximate cause, Carol is the proximate cause.
Depending if the court follows Judge Cardozo or Judge Andrews, Carol may still be considered the proximate cause.
DAMAGES
Damages discussed and defined supra. CONCLUSION TO NEGLIGENCE
As discussed above, Carol had the duty towards Victor to act with [a] standard of reasonable care but the breach of the duty may only be the factual cause and not also the proximate cause of Victor?s damages. Carol may or may not be found negligent.
?????26

DEFENSES - CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Defined and discussed above.
If Carol is found to be negligent, this defense will fail for Carol as well for the same reasons it will for Alice and Bob.
DEFENSE - ASSUMPTION OF RISK
Defined and discussed above.
If Carol is found to be negligent, this defense will fail for Carol as well for the same reasons it will fail for Alice and Bob.
??27

Question 3
Deanna, a single mother of ten-year old Vickie, worked as a cashier at the local grocery store. Deanna had recently broken off her relationship with Randy, a drug addict who had been violent toward her on several occasions. One morning Randy was in the parking lot outside the grocery store and telephoned Deanna at work. Randy told Deanna that a friend of his was outside Vickie?s school. Randy said that if Deanna did not immediately bring $1,000 to Randy in the parking lot, he would call and direct his friend to harm Vickie.
Over the next several minutes, Deanna put in her pants pocket $400 from her cash register at the grocery store. She then went to the manager?s office, where she had heard there was a safe containing a large amount of cash. No one else was in the manager?s office.
Alma, an assistant manager who works at the cash register next to Deanna?s, saw how upset Deanna was after the phone call. Alma followed Deanna to the manager?s office, where she found Deanna looking through desk drawers. Deanna told Alma that she was looking for the keys to the safe because she "needed some papers" from it. Alma smiled, told Deanna where the keys were, and then said, "You don?t have to lie to me, Deanna. I?ll be outside keeping watch for you." Deanna replied, "Thank you so much, Alma, I am in a desperate situation right now and will return the money to the safe as soon as I can."
As Alma stood in the hallway outside the manager?s office, Deanna opened the safe, removed $600, relocked the safe, and returned the key to its location. Deanna then brought $1,000 to Randy in the grocery store parking lot.
What crimes, if any, can Deanna and Alma reasonably be charged with, and what defenses might each assert? Discuss.
28

Answer A to Question 3
What crimes can Deanna and Alma be charged with and what defenses might they assert?
State v. Deanna
Common Law Burglary
Common Law Burglary is defined as the breaking and entering [of a] dwelling house of another at night with the intent to commit a felony.
Here, the local store is not a dwelling house, and the theft does not occur at night, and there is not breaking and entering. Thus, there is no Common Law Burglary.
Modern Statutory Burglary
Modernly, breaking has evolved into unauthorized entry. Nighttime has been eliminated. Dwelling house has changed to any protected structure. Here, we have an unauthorized entry into a protected structure, the safe, during the day without consent or privilege.
Inner Door Doctrine
If a room or inner structure is part of the protected structure, here, the Grocery Store, if the D breaks into the Safe, it will be construed as an inner breaking for burglary purposes.
Here, Deanna broke into the safe, and took $600 which was the property of another, the Store. Thus, unauthorized entry and breaking into the safe, without consent, with the intent to commit a crime, the larceny, taking of the $600.
Defenses
Deanna will argue that she had consent of Alma, who was her supervisor. Store will assert that Alma had no such right and that the entry was without consent, voiding the use of the key. The defense fails, and she commits a larceny.
Larceny
Under the Common Law (CL) is a trespassory taking of and carrying away of the tangible personal property of another with the specific intent to permanently deprive the owner.
Here, Deanna, takes the property with the "intent to return the money" according to the facts. If the Court believes this, she would have a defense to the larceny and the underlying modern burglary. However, she handles the money in such a way, "giving the money to Randy," who intends to abscond with it. Since she lacks the substantial capacity to return the money, then the Court must find the "intent to permanently deprive or steal". Further, Deanna is a low level
????????29

employee, and would only have custody of any money. This also leads to larceny and not embezzlement.
Thus, Deanna will be guilty of larceny. Defenses
Consent/Condonation
Is defined as willingness by the victim. Here, Deanna will argue that Alma gave her consent and the key to the safe. The DA will argue that the key was given to Anna with "fraudulent intent", as she told Alma she was going to find some papers.
This would give rise to the Continuing Trespass doctrine. Thus, when Deanna gives the money to Randy, who has no intent to return it to her, the mens rea, for intent to steal, becomes concurrent with the continuing trespass in larceny.
Duress
Is defined as an act by another person, which in the reasonable person would lead to the compunction to commit a crime. It is only available for minor crimes like larceny and not murder. Here, Randy threatened immediate harm to Deanna?s daughter, a very serious offense of severe bodily injury. A reasonable person of normal resistance would probably have acted the same. If believed by the Court, Deanna could have a defense to the larceny and the Burglary supra.
Embezzlement
Is defined as the wrongful conversion of the tangible personal property of another entrusted with lawful possession.
When Deanna took the $400 from the cash register it was already in safekeeping of the Grocery Store (Store). Thus, store had possession, and even though Deanna would usually have only custody, here she has possession. Deanna puts the money in her pocket, and thus she intends to "convert it to her own use" by giving it to Randy. Since she had possession the property charge on the $400 is embezzlement.
Thus, Deanna, can be charged with Embezzlement of the $400.
Conspiracy
Is the agreement by 2 or more persons with the Specific Intent to Commit the Target Crime.
Modernly, the majority requires an overt act in furtherance of the Conspiracy. Here, the target crimes will be larceny and Burglary of the Safe.
???????30

Wharton Rule
There must be one more criminal mind to commit a conspiracy than is required to commit the crime. Here, since larceny and embezzlement can be committed by one person the rule is satisfied.
Pinkerton Rule
All coconspirators can be charged with and convicted of all the crimes of the other coconspirators, which are committed in furtherance of the criminal conspiracy.
Agreement
At Common Law that was all that was required. Modernly, there is the overt act here; the opening of the safe with the key is the overt act.
Implied Agreement
Here, the facts are silent about the agreement; however, Alma "followed Deanna into the manager?s office" and stood lookout for her. This would be an implied agreement to commit the crime by Alma. If the Court does not find this as an agreement, the DA can still get Alma as an accomplice, as noted infra. Under Pinkerton, both of the D?s, Deanna and Alma, will be charged with all of the crimes.
Unilateral Theory of Conspiracy
Under a jurisdiction that follows the MPC, only the Defendant has to consider himself as conspiring with someone to be charged with conspiracy. Thus, in a jurisdiction that follows the MPC, Deanna could be charged with conspiracy without the agreement of Alma.
Conclusion
Larceny of the $600.
Embezzlement of the $400.
Modern Statutory Burglary of the Safe.
Conspiracy to Commit Larceny, Embezzlement, and Burglary. State v. Alma
Accomplice
Is defined as Aiding and Abetting the Principal in the commission of the crime with the Specific Intent that the crime be committed. Here, Alma by conduct accompanied Deanna to the office to open the safe. She also smiled, which is construed as consent, and proceeded to "keeping watch for you".
????????????31

Thus, by conduct she aided Deanna by telling her where the keys were, and demonstrated her approval. So Alma aided and abetted Deanna in the crimes.
Accomplice Liability
An accomplice is chargeable with all the crimes of the principals that are reasonably foreseeable in the target crimes. Here, the larceny and embezzlement, and the burglary of the safe are all foreseeable. Thus, if the Court does not find the agreement in the conspiracy then Alma can still be charged as an accomplice.
Defenses for Alma. None.
Conclusion
Alma can be charged with all of the crimes of Deanna, either under Conspiracy Theory, or as an accomplice depending on whether the Court finds the Agreement for the Conspiracy (Implied by Conduct).
??????32

CRIMES OF DEANNA (D)
Answer B to Question 3
EMBEZZLEMENT - $400
Embezzlement is accomplished when a defendant has fraudulently converted personal property of another through lawful possession of the property, with the intent to permanently deprive the other of the property. Distinguishing possession as lawful makes embezzlement distinct from other theft crimes because the property is not always taken through a trespass inconsistent with the rights of a true owner, but rather is converted (absorbed to make of no use by the owner) by the defendant who can be in a fiduciary capacity, such as an employee, banker, or executor.
When D took the $400 out of her register, it was not a necessarily unlawful taking, since cashiers are entrusted by their employers to remove money from the safe as part of their job responsibilities. However, her taking was fraudulent since [she] removed the money with the intent to deprive the store of it in order to pay Randy (R) the blackmail money for Vickie (V), and thus her intent to use the $400 was inconsistent with her employer?s trust with her job. Moreover, since she took the money while she was working at the time of the taking, D had a right to possess it at the time she removed it. Lastly, because the money was not hers to take, it was the personal property of Store (S).
Therefore, without an effective defense by D, D will be convicted for embezzlement for the $400. Additionally, the prosecution could argue that since D formed intent to steal prior to taking the money from the register, the taking was not lawfully possessed and D should be convicted of larceny. However, the fact that D had intent to deprive for permanent and private use is not determinative.
DURESS
Duress is available as a defense if the defendant acted criminally due to threatened serious harm or death to himself, his family, or another person, and the defendant reasonably believes the crime needs to be committed due to the immediate threat in order to avoid the harm. Duress can be used as a defense unless the crime is murder (except felony murder), manslaughter, or a property offense. None of the exceptions apply, as the threat was to another person, D?s son.
D will probably be successful in her defense unless she cannot establish that the belief she had of an immediate battery to V was reasonably imminent. Because R had a history of violence with D, and R and D had recently broken off their romantic relationship, it is likely that D had reasonable grounds to believe that R was telling the truth about his friend being near V?s school, and the threat of harm to V would actually occur. However, since it was morning and V was likely at
??33

school in the custody of several adult supervisors, it might be unreasonable for D to believe that even if R?s friend got into the school he would be successful in beating V. Further, since there was a phone in the grocery store near the register of D which she used to talk to R when he delivered the threat, D reasonably could have called the police, or called the school to warn of R?s friend looking for V, instead of reacting by embezzling the money. Nonetheless, since D knew of R?s capacity for violence and a caring mother can reasonably be expected to panic or succumb to threats of violence to a son, the question of whether D reacted reasonably should be left to a jury. Apart from the element of imminency, the rest of the elements are satisfied since the threatened harm was violence. V is D?s son, and D actually did believe the harm would occur, since her conduct manifests belief.
Thus, if the jury finds D?s belief of an imminent serious threat to V reasonable, then she should be excused under duress.
THEFT
Theft is modernly the grouping given to an assortment of property crimes including larceny, larceny by trick, (merge into larceny) larceny, embezzlement, and forgery.
ATTEMPTED LARCENY
An attempt is a substantial step towards the completion of a crime with the specific intent to complete it.
When D was looking through the drawers, the prosecution could allege that it was a substantial step towards the crime of larceny. D will say that her only intent was to save her daughter, not to steal.
Thus, D will prevail if she is found to have an unacceptable mental state. Note though that attempt will merge into a completed larceny.
LARCENY BY TRICK - KEYS
Larceny by trick is a fraudulent representation of fact to another, with the intent to deprive her of possession to property.
When D told A "I need to look in the safe for some papers" she made a false representation, since she needed to get in the safe and steal the money. Moreover, when D responded by giving her the keys to the safe, despite her assumption that D was lying, D acquired possession to the keys. It was merely possession of the keys acquired by D, so her intention to return and the fact that she did return it is not relevant. Note that while the register was allowed access by D as an employee, the safe in the manager?s office is not, which is indicated by the fact that D did not know where the keys were when she searched through the drawers, and A did since she was in the manager?s office and A is an assistant manager.
???34

Thus, D might be charged with larceny by trick, unless her intention from making the statement was not to compel A to give her possession of the keys.
LARCENY - $600
Larceny is a trespassory taking and carrying away of personal property belonging to another, with an intent to permanently deprive the other of it.
The taking was trespassory for the reasoning described above which is that access to the safe was not a fiduciary privilege afforded to D. Additionally, when D took the $600 from the safe she removed it from the safe, and walked out, which is sufficient for a "taking" and "carrying away" of the store?s $600 right of possession in property. Lastly, because D intended to take the $600 she took from the safe, and expressed that she would "return it as soon as she could" is not preclusive for larceny because she intended to give R the money she took from S, permanently depriving S of those $600.
As such, D may be charged with Larceny, and a conviction of larceny by trick could merge into this if a lesser included offense exists,
DEFENSE
DURESS
D will likely give the same reasoning for Larceny as she does to Embezzlement, which should turn on the same issue of reasonable conduct discussed above.
CRIMES OF ALMA (A)
SOLICITATION
Solicitation occurs when a party speaks to another with the specific intent to encourage her to commit a crime, either for her, or on her behalf. The crime solicited will merge into the completed crime, an attempt, or, if the other party responds affirmatively, into a conspiracy. Liability for solicitation will attach as an accomplice to the crime solicited, since the person acted to facilitate the occurrence of the crime.
When A said to D "I?ll be outside watching [for] you" it could reasonably be understood as encouragement to go forth with the crime A believed D was perpetrating. However, the solicitation came after D had undertaken performance into stealing from the safe, and since D had already formed the proper mental state to steal from the store, A is probably better analyzed under an accomplice theory.
ACCESSORY TO LARCENY
An accessory is a party who aids, abets, or otherwise contributes to the commission of a crime with the specific intent that it be committed. A principal need not be convicted itself of the crime in order to be an accomplice;
??????35

it is sufficient that the helper had a requisite mental state and act in furtherance of the crime in order to be convicted.
When A told D that she would watch out for her, and that D "did not have to lie" about the reason for her looking through the drawers, she implicitly confirmed to D that she approved of the crime, and actively would help to bring about the theft. Since A was a manager and could know of the location of the keys, A?s communication to D of the location of the keys was a significant help in order to get into the safe.
As such, D should properly be charged as an accessory to theft, and if solicitation is found it would merge.
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT LARCENY
A conspiracy is an agreement between 2 or more people to commit an unlawful act, with the specific intent between the parties to agree as well as to commit the crime, and in some jurisdictions a substantial step is necessary.
The prosecution will argue that because A "understood" what D was doing in taking the money from the safe, when A said "I?ll watch out for you" and D said "Thank you, I?ll return it as soon as I can" an agreement took place between the two of them, since they had a mutual understanding and assent for D to take the money from the safe. D will argue in response that she did not have the requisite intent to conspire with D [sic], since her influence from R inspired her to steal, and that she thus did not intend to take the money but for R?s threat to V.
D will probably prevail regardless of the outcome with her duress defense, since it will [be] difficult to show that even if she did act unreasonably that her intent to steal was separate from the threat from R.
As such, unless the jurisdiction has adopted the Model Penal Code?s unilateral conspiracy doctrine, A did not conspire with B.
DEFENSE
A will argue that she should not be an accessory because she did not know what crime D was going to commit. That will fail since she knew D would likely steal from the safe.
??36

Question 4
Selma owned two adjoining parcels of land. She entered into negotiations to sell her west lot to Barnaby, who was looking for a good location for his new carpet store. On Selma?s adjoining east lot were a large billboard that would obscure the view of Barnaby?s carpet store, a partially-collapsed, abandoned greenhouse, and several abandoned cars and old tires.
After Selma and Barnaby agreed on a price for the west lot, they signed a valid standard real estate sales contract. In a blank space at the end of the contract under the caption, "Other Terms," were the handwritten words, "Selma to clear debris from adjoining east lot." The standard contract also contained a clause, "This contract represents the entire agreement of the parties. There are no additional representations, promises or conditions precedent to the effectiveness of this agreement." According to Barnaby, Selma had promised during their negotiations that she would remove the billboard, the greenhouse, the cars and the tires from the adjoining east lot if Barnaby agreed to purchase the west lot.
By the date for the closing of the sale, Selma had not yet done any work on the adjoining east lot, although she told Barnaby that she fully intended to do everything she had promised. The parties exchanged the purchase price and a deed to the west lot. The following week, Selma had the abandoned cars and old tires removed from the adjoining east lot. When Barnaby asked her about the removal of the billboard and the greenhouse, Selma denied having made any commitment to remove the billboard, which she said brings in substantial rental income from advertisers. She also denied promising to remove the greenhouse, which she indicated she hoped to repair and reopen some day.
Barnaby wants to keep the purchased lot and has already started construction of the carpet store. He would, however, like to obtain a court order directing Selma to remove the billboard and greenhouse and/or to collect monetary damages from her for breach of contract.
1. Is Barnaby likely to prevail in a breach of contract action against Selma? Discuss.
2. If Barnaby does prevail against Selma, is he entitled to specific performance and/or monetary damages? Discuss.
37

BARNABY V. SELMA
Answer A to Question 4
?This is a breach of contract case wherein a valid contract exists that Barnaby claims was breached by Selma.
BREACH - Did Selma breach her contract with Barnaby?
A breach occurs [when] one party to a contract fails to perform in accordance with the provisions of the contract. If a breach is material, the court will not enforce the contract but if the breach is minor, a court will usually enforce the contract but award damages for the breach.
In this case, Barnaby claims that Selma breached the standard real estate sales contract, where he claims that, in addition to selling him the west lot, he claims that Selma agreed also to remove a large billboard, a partially-collapsed, abandoned greenhouse, and several abandoned cars and old tires. Selma will argue that she did not breach the contract because she removed the "debris" from the lot as promised. Whether a breach occurred will depend on the specific provisions of the contract.
CONDITIONS
The contract at bar contains a condition precedent, which is a condition that one must meet prior to the duty of the other party to perform, which states, "Selma to clear debris from adjoining east lot". Selma contends that she met this condition by removing the abandoned cars and old tires from the east lot. Barnaby argues that she was also required to remove the greenhouse and billboard pursuant to a promise made by Selma during their negotiations. It should be noted that the facts show that Selma did not meet this condition prior to Barnaby?s closing on the west lot and that Barnaby waived his right to rescind the contract because he proceeded to close on the contract without requiring Selma to perform as required. Instead, he relied on Selma?s promise that she "fully intended to do everything she had promised." To Barnaby, this meant removal of the billboard and greenhouse as well as the cars and tires but to Selma, she only meant the cars and tires. Thus, there is no meeting of the minds.
Instead of asking the court to rescind the contract, Barnaby wants to keep the lot and has asked the court to find that Selma has breached the contract by failing to remove the billboard and greenhouse. Whether the court finds that Selma breached her duty will depend on whether the contract is clear as to the intent of the parties. If a contract is not clear, a court will look to parol evidence.
??38

PAROL EVIDENCE
Parol evidence is a doctrine that holds that a court will only look to the four corners of a contract to interpret the intention of the parties and that no oral agreements made between the parties will be allowed into evidence in order to determine the intent of the parties.
In this case, Selma will argue that parol evidence is not allowable because there is an integration clause contained in the contract, which states, "This contract represents the entire agreement of the parties. There are no additional representations, promises or conditions precedent to the effectiveness of this agreement."
A. Integration/Merger Clause
When a contract contains an integration or merger clause, as it is sometimes called, a court is reluctant to look outside the four corners of the contract because this clause is evidence that the parties intended for all their extraneous agreements to have been fully incorporated into the contract. Barnaby will argue that parol evidence is still allowed even when there is an integration clause when a term in the contract is ambiguous or unclear.
B. Ambiguity
When a contract contains a provision that is ambiguous, the courts will allow parol evidence into evidence even when there is a merger/integration clause in the contract as long as it does not change or add a term but only clarifies a term.
Here, Barnaby will say that the term "debris" is unclear and that parol evidence should be permitted in order to clarify the term as it was intended by the parties. Barnaby will also maintain that as long as the parol evidence does not change or add a term, it is allowable even in light of the integration clause. Barnaby will say the term "debris? is ambiguous because it is unclear what this term means. Barnaby will submit that allowing parol evidence will not change this term or add to the term but will only clarify the intent of the parties as far as what was to be removed from the adjoining lot.
Selma will argue that the term "debris? is not ambiguous because the term pertains only to those things that have no value and pertains essentially to trash. She will further argue that she removed all the "debris? or trash from the lot as required. Barnaby will argue that a partially-collapsed abandoned greenhouse is trash as much as abandoned cars are trash. Barnaby makes a good point so that it is likely that the court will allow parol evidence to determine whether Selma promised to remove the greenhouse as part of the "debris?.
???39

As to whether the billboard is considered "debris?, it is unlikely that a large billboard that brings revenue to Selma would be considered "debris?. On the issue of the billboard, a court will most likely not allow parol evidence to clarify the intent of the parties.
In the event that the court allows parol evidence and the court or jury finds that it was the intention of the parties to remove the greenhouse, the Court will find that Selma breached the contract and fashion[ed] a remedy. The question remains then whether the court will require specific performance or award monetary damages to Barnaby.
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE
A court will order specific performance in cases involving subjects that are unique, such as real estate.
If a court finds through parol evidence that Selma promised Barnaby that she would remove the partially-collapsed, abandoned greenhouse, it is likely that the court will order Selma to remove it or move it to a location that will not interfere with Barnaby?s property. This is not to say that Selma could not construct a new greenhouse in the same spot or some other structure but she would be required to remove the existing one from the lot.
DAMAGES
A court has the power to award damages for breach of contract. Exemplary damages are not ordinarily awarded in contract cases and there is no evidence that there was a liquidated damages clause in the agreement between Barnaby and Selma. There is also no information to show that Barnaby incurred any reliance damages, which are damages awarded based on a reliance of a representation made by a party concerning the value. General damages are damages that [are] not of a pecuniary nature, such as pain and suffering, loss of consortium, etc. Here, Barnaby has not suffered any general damages. Therefore the court is left with awarding special damages, which are pecuniary damages. Since Barnaby has not built his carpet business, he cannot show any pecuniary losses as a result of Selma?s breach. According[ly] the court will most likely not award any monetary damages.
??40

Barnaby vs. Selma
Statute of Frauds
Answer B to Question 4
In contract law, the statute of frauds states that the following contracts must be in writing to be enforceable at law: marriage, contracts which cannot be completed within a year, contracts regarding land, executor contracts, guarantors of debts, and for goods over $500.
Here, this contract is regarding the sale of land because it is for the sale of a parcel of land. Contracts for the sale of land must be in writing in order to be enforceable in court. Selma and Barnaby executed a standard real estate sales contract.
Therefore, this contract does not fall within the statute of frauds.
Parol Evidence Rule
In contract law, the parol evidence rule states that in a written contract that represents the entire agreement, prior negotiations cannot be used as evidence as to the terms of the contract.
Here, there was a statement in the contract which stated that "This contract represents the entire agreement of the parties. There are no additional representations, promises or conditions precedent to the effectiveness of this agreement." This statement means that all prior negotiations, evidence, or promises will not be admissible when determining the terms of the contract. The parol evidence rule encourages the free flow of negotiations without the fear that will be used against the parties later after the contract has been written.
Here, there is a note at the bottom of the contract which states, "Selma to clear debris from adjoining east lot." Since this was written into the contract, this could be part of the contract, but any pre-negotiations talk could not be used to clarify what was meant by this statement.
Therefore, any negotiations regarding the removal of the billboard and the greenhouse which were pre-contract negotiations will not be able to be admissible to determine the terms of the contract.
Breach of Contract
Under contract law, a breach of contract occurs when one part fails to perform their duties as required by contract.
41

Here, pursuant to the contract, Selma was required to remove the debris, as a condition of the contract. Selma did have the abandoned cars and the old tires removed from the adjoining east lot. Barnaby is making the claim that debris was to include the partially-collapsed, abandoned greenhouse and the billboard sign. If this is true, then Selma would be in breach of contract because she did not remove these. Selma is making the claim that she never made any commitment to remove the billboard nor the greenhouse.
In this case, since the court will not be able to look at prior negotiations, the court would have to look toward the meaning of debris and evaluate the greenhouse and billboard as to whether they are included in this term.
Selma stated that the billboard brings in substantial rental income from advertisers. Selma also stated that she hoped to repair and reopen the greenhouse someday.
In this case, the court could determine that the greenhouse is abandoned and therefore debris, unless Selma is able to repair it within a certain manner of time. In the case of the billboard, if the billboard truly is bringing substantial income, then this would unlikely be included in the term debris.
Specific Performance
Under contract law, specific performance occurs when the court will award a specific item, action, etc. because monetary damages are inappropriate.
Here, if the court rules that Selma is in breach of contract by not removing the debris, then it may be unjust to award Barnaby a monetary amount when what Barnaby actually wants and the contract requires [is] the specific performance of removing those items.
Therefore, if the court determined that the billboard and/or the greenhouse were within the meaning of debris as to the contract, then the court could award an order for specific performance requiring Selma to remove the remaining debris.
Special Damages
Under contract law, special damages are damages which are pecuniary in nature, meaning that they result from economic loss, such as loss of business, etc., which are a consequence of the breach.
Here, the carpet store is still in construction, so the debris remaining on the adjoining lot will not at this point result in customer loss or loss of business.
Therefore, at this point, it will not be likely that Barnaby will be awarded special damages. If Barnaby prevailed and the court decided not to make Selma remove
42

the items, then the court could award any damages that it believed would result from the debris in a judgment in favor of Barnaby.
43


???California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2009
?
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2009 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2009 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors and may not be reprinted.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions.
??Question Number
1.
2.
3.
4. Torts
Subject Page
???Torts 4 Contracts 15 Criminal Law 30
2
44

ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?3

Question 1
Al, Bob, Carl, and Dolly were coworkers at Zco. Al, Bob, and Carl did not like Dolly and wanted her fired from Zco.
On Monday, all employees of Zco were required to attend a mandatory meeting. Prior to the meeting, Al entered Dolly's office and told her not to leave her office until the meeting was over. He then said to her, "If you leave this office before the meeting is over, some of my friends and I will come to your home and beat you up." Al then left for the meeting. Dolly, scared for her safety, remained in her office, missed the meeting, and was reprimanded by Carl, her supervisor.
On Tuesday, Bob placed a sleeping pill in Dolly's coffee when Dolly was not looking. Dolly drank the coffee and fell asleep at her desk twenty minutes later. She slept for four hours, and was again reprimanded by Carl for sleeping on the job.
On Wednesday, the Human Resources Manager for Zco asked Carl if he knew why Dolly had missed the meeting on Monday and fell asleep at her desk on Tuesday. Carl responded that Dolly had a serious drinking problem that interfered with her job performance. Carl was aware of the actual reasons why Dolly had missed the meeting on Monday and fell asleep on Tuesday, and he had no reason to believe that she had a drinking problem. On Thursday, Dolly was fired from Zco.
Under what intentional tort theories might an action for damages be brought by Dolly against Al, Bob, and Carl, and what defenses, if any, might Al, Bob, or Carl assert, and what are the likely results?
Discuss.
4

Dolly v. Al
1. False Imprisonment
Answer A to Question 1
??Dolly may have a cause of action against Al for false imprisonment.
False imprisonment is a volitional act done with the requisite intent that causes plaintiff to be confined to a bounded area and the plaintiff is aware of the confinement or injured.
Intent
To be intentional the defendant must have desired the outcome of his conduct or be substantially certain that the outcome would occur as a result of his conduct. Here, the facts are clear that Al acted voluntarily and intentionally by telling Dolly she could not leave her office.
Confined to a bounded area
The plaintiff must be confined to a bounded area against the plaintiff's will. Here, Al told Dolly she could not leave her office and if she did that he and some friends would come to her home and beat her up. This threat would make Dolly fearful and feel that she could not leave her office. However, Al will assert that he told her not to leave her office until the meeting was over; therefore, she was not confined. This argument will fail as confinement for a short period of time will establish confinement. Although Al left for the office meeting immediately and Dolly would have been able to escape her office, the confinement by Al had already taken place. In addition, Dolly will assert that she was afraid to leave the office due to the threat of harm by Al and his friends. Use of threats of harm is sufficient to form a barrier for confinement to a bounded area. Therefore, Dolly will have a cause of action against Al for false imprisonment.
???5

2. Assault
Dolly may also have a cause of action against Al for assault. Assault is a volitional act done with the requisite intent that causes the plaintiff to fear an imminent harmful or offensive touching.
Intent - as defined under false imprisonment supra.
Here, Al's conduct of telling Dolly that he and some friends will come over to her house and beat her up shows that he voluntarily and intentionally engaged in the conduct. Therefore the intent element is satisfied.
Fear and apprehension
The plaintiff must be placed in fear of apprehension of an imminent attack in order to recover for assault. Here, the facts are clear that Dolly was scared.
Imminent harmful or offensive touching
The issue here is whether there was an imminent harmful or offensive touching. Al will assert that his threat was of future harm and not imminent; therefore this element is not established. Here, Al's threat is open-ended as coming to one's home to beat them up [and] doesn't necessarily mean that same day. Therefore, it is unlikely Dolly will prevail on the cause of action for assault.
3. Dolly v. Bob
Dolly may have a cause of action against Bob for battery.
Battery is a volitional act done with the requisite intent that causes plaintiff to suffer a harmful and offensive contact.
??????6

Intent - as defined under Al, false imprisonment supra.
Here, the facts are clear that Bob voluntarily and intentionally placed the sleeping pill in Dolly's coffee.
Harmful and offensive contact
The harmful or offensive contact must be to the plaintiff's person or something closely connected thereto. Here, Bob put the pill in Dolly's coffee when she wasn't looking. A coffee cup is something closely connected to the plaintiff. Bob will assert that he did not touch Dolly; however, injection of the pill will suffice. Bob will be liable to Dolly for battery.
Dolly v. Carl - Defamation
Dolly may have a cause of action against Carl for defamation.
Defamation is a defamatory statement of and concerning the plaintiff that is published and causes damages to plaintiff's reputation.
Defamatory Statement - A statement is defamatory if it holds the plaintiff up to scorn or ridicule or lowers plaintiff's esteem in a minority of respectable community. Here, Carl's statement that Dolly has a serious drinking problem would be defamatory in that it would lower her esteem among her coworkers.
Of and concerning the plaintiff
The defamatory statement must be understood as to be about the plaintiff. Here, Carl's statement was defamatory on its face in that it was made to the Human Resources Manager in response to her question about Dolly missing the meeting and falling asleep
??????7

at her desk. Therefore, Dolly will not have to provide any extrinsic facts to show the statement was made about her.
Published to - The defamatory statement must be intentionally or negligently published to a third person. Here, Carl intentionally made the statement to the Human Resources Manager; therefore it was published.
Damages to the Plaintiff
Slander per se is slander in which damages are presumed and the plaintiff will not have to prove special damages. (Slander is any form of oral defamation.) One way to establish slander per se is if the defamatory statement implies misconduct of one's business trade or profession. Here, Carl's statement that Dolly had a drinking problem that interfered with her job performance would impute that Dolly's drinking problem caused professional misconduct.
Therefore, Dolly will be entitled to damages.
Defenses
Conditional privilege
Carl will assert that he was privileged to make the defamatory statement about Dolly since he was her supervisor and the statement was made to the Human Resources Manager regarding her work. However, Carl will lose this privilege because he acted intentionally by making the statement he knew was false because the facts show that he was aware of the real reason Dolly missed the meeting. Therefore, Carl will be liable to Dolly for percuniary and nonpecuniary damages for defamation.
????8

Answer B to Question 1
Intentional Tort Theories which Dolly may have action against Al, Bob and Carl
Dolly v. Al
Assault
Assault is the volitional intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful or offensive touching without consent or privilege.
The facts indicate that Al entered Dolly's office prior to the meeting and told her not to leave her office until the meeting was over or he and some of his friends would go to her home and beat her up.
By Al speaking the threat, this was a voluntary movement. By Al telling Dolly he would go to her home if she did not remain in the office, his intent was to scare her or he should've been substantially certain that this threat would've scared one in Dolly's position.
By Al stating that he would come to her home, this was a reasonable apprehension. The facts indicate that Dolly was scared for her safety.
The threat was to go to her home later on because it would've had to have been after Al got off work. This means that it was not an imminent threat to her person.
Al will not be liable for assault to Dolly.
???9

False Imprisonment
False imprisonment is the volitional, intentional confinement of another within fixed boundaries, for any period of time, without consent or privilege, in which there is no reasonable means of egress.
Al went in to Dolly's office and told her "not to leave." This was a voluntary act and a volitional movement of Al. By Al saying "if you leave..." his intent was to keep her in the office or he was substantially certain that she would remain. Dolly was already in her office which has 4 walls and a door indicating it was within fixed boundaries. She wasn't to leave until after the meeting was over, which may have been a considerable amount of time.
The facts indicated that she was "scared for her safety" and "remained in her office" because of a future threat of Al and friends beating her up. She did have the ability to walk out and tell a supervisor which gave her reasonable means to escape.
Al will not be liable to Dolly for false imprisonment.
Defenses to Al's Assault and False Imprisonment Liability:
Defense to Assault:
The facts do not indicate that Al would've had any good reason to threaten Dolly, but due to it being a future threat, he will not be liable.
Defenses to False Imprisonment:
Consent - can be expressed or by conduct. Al will argue that Dolly could've walked out at any time during the meeting, and that she impliedly consented by remaining in her office.
????10

Al will not be liable for false imprisonment.
Dolly v. Bob
Battery
Battery is the volitional intentional harmful or offensive touching of another without consent or privilege.
Bob placed a sleeping pill in Dolly's coffee. This was a physical voluntary act of Bob. By giving her a sleeping pill, he intended her to fall asleep or should've been aware that her falling asleep was substantially certain to occur. Although he did not hurt her, the reasonable person would not appreciate someone slipping any substance into their drink. This indicates there was an offensive touching. Dolly's drink was an item so closely associated with her person, as to be a touching directly to her. The facts state that Dolly was not looking. This is an indication that she did not consent to Bob's act of giving her the pill.
Bob will be liable for assault absent any defenses.
Defenses to Battery:
The facts do not indicate that Bob had any valid defense to his actions.
???11

Dolly v. Carl:
Defamation:
Slander Per Se (as to Business)
Defamation is the false defamatory statement publicated [sic] to a 3rd party, wherein the 3rd party knows and understands the statement to be of and concerning the plaintiff in which the plaintiff suffers damages.
Carl told the Human Resources Manager that Dolly had a serious drinking problem that interfered with her work.
Carl knew this to be false because he knew that Bob had given her sleeping pills. By the H.R. Manager believing Dolly to be a drinker, this could lower her esteem within her workplace and, therefore, the statement was defamatory.
Carl spoke this to the H.R. Manager, which [sic] was a 3rd person, and it was directly related to Dolly and the H.R. Manager understood it to be of and concerning Dolly since that is who he inquired about.
Dolly lost her job as a result of Carl's words about her performance. Because the slander was directed to her business involvement, damages are presumed.
Carl will be liable for defamation absent any defense.
Defenses to Defamation:
Truth:
The facts state Carl "was aware of the actual reason." This is not a valid defense.
?????12

Qualified Privilege:
The facts state that Carl was aware of the actual reason and had "no" reason to believe that she had a drinking problem. This means that the statement made by Carl was not in good faith, which extinguishes his privilege to the employer.
Injurious Falsehood:
An act by Carl which purposefully interferes and causes another not to deal with Dolly. Carl told the H.R. Manager that Dolly had a "drinking problem." This statement was intended to cause the H.R. Manager not to deal with Dolly any further.
Dolly was fired as a result, which she suffered damages.
Carl will be liable for injurious falsehood, absent any applicable defenses.
Interference with Expectancy of a Contract:
One is liable if he intentionally interferes with the expectancy of another in dealings in a contract.
The facts indicate that Dolly was fired for her "alcohol use," which was false. Carl told this purposely to get Dolly into trouble. This was an intentional interference between his corporation and her. She suffered damages by being fired.
Carl will be liable absent any valid defense.
???13

Remedies
Dolly will recover general damages and punitive damages from Bob regarding the battery and general damages and punitive damages from Carl, and also any special damages from losing her employment if they can be reasonably calculated.
?14

Question 2
Delta Print Co. ("Delta") ordered three identical Model 100 printing presses from Press Manufacturer Co. ("Press"). Delta's written order form described the items ordered by model number. Delta agreed to pay Press $25,000 for each Model 100 press. A few days later, Press sent Delta its own form confirming the order. Press's form repeated all of the items on Delta's form, but added the clause, "Delta must make any complaints concerning defects in, or nonconformity of, the goods delivered within a reasonable period after delivery."
One week later, Press delivered the Model 100 printing presses to Delta's place of business. Delta immediately removed its old printing presses and placed two of the new presses into operation. Delta stored the third new press in its original unopened carton. One week after delivery, Delta's Vice President for Operations, Vanessa, notified Press's Sales Manager, Sally, that it wanted to return the third press. Sally asked why it wanted to return the press, and Vanessa responded, "Delta doesn't need a third press at this time." Sally replied that all sales were final and that Delta was obligated to pay for all three presses. Vanessa said that Delta did not want the third press and expected Press to pick it up immediately. Sally responded that she would have a truck pick up the third press the next day, but that Delta was expected to pay for all three presses.
The next day, Press picked up the third press. Press sold the third press to Offset Printing Co. ("Offset") a week later for $22,000 - a discount off the contract price of $25,000. It cost Press $18,000 to build the Model 100 press. Offset is one of the largest printing companies in State X and regularly purchases multiple Model 100 printing presses from Press. Press maintains a large inventory of the Model 100 printing press because of its popularity.
Delta has not yet paid for any of the three Model 100 presses despite repeated demands by Press.
Is Press likely to prevail in an action against Delta for breach of contract and, if so, what is the likely measure of damages? Discuss.
15

Press v. Delta
Answer A to Question 2
?1. Is Press likely to prevail in an action for breach of contract against Delta?
UCC or Common Law?
Under the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), all goods are covered under the UCC. A good is a tangible, movable object when it is identified to the contract. If the UCC is silent with regard to a matter involving the sale or buying of goods or the subject matter does not fall under the UCC, then the Common Law is used.
The "three identical model 100" printing presses were tangible, movable objects when identified to the contract.
Conclusion: The UCC controls because the subject matter of the contract involves goods.
Merchants?
Under the UCC, a merchant is an entity that regularly trades in the goods subject to the sale or purchase, or by experience or profession holds himself out to be particularly knowledgeable of the goods or type of goods traded.
Here, Delta is a merchant because it is the "Delta Print Co." and Press is a merchant because "Press maintains a large inventory of the Model 100 printing press."
Conclusion: Both parties are merchants.
??16

Delta's written order form an offer?
Under the UCC, the objective manifestation of intent to enter into a bargain with specified essential terms communicated to a party such that a reasonable person would believe that assent would form a bargain is a valid offer. The essential terms for an offer under the UCC are the parties and quantity.
Here, Delta "ordered three identical Model100 printing presses from Press Manufacture Co. ("Press")." Delta sufficiently supplied the minimum terms to form a bargain because "Delta's written order form described the items ordered by model number."
Conclusion: Delta's written order forms an offer.
Valid Acceptance by Press?
Under the UCC, an acceptance can be made in any reasonable manner, if not specifically indicated in the offer, including the shipping of goods or the promising of the shipping of goods. Unlike the Common Law's Mirror Image Rule, which requires an unequivocal assent to the offer's terms, the UCC under 2-207 permits acceptance with varying terms as long as the varying terms are not materially different than the offer, the offer did not expressly state that the offer was conditioned on the acceptance of the explicit terms, or the offeror objects within a reasonable time. Varying terms do not materially offer [sic] the contract if they are implied material terms. An implied material term is one which is implied by the making of a contract such as that the parties will operate in good faith and fair dealing, and that the parties will follow the UCC and other laws.
Here, there is a valid acceptance by Press because "Press sent Delta its own form confirming the order." The manner of acceptance is reasonable because the written confirmation would [be] in a manner identical or similar to Delta's offer. Delta's clause stating that "Delta must make any complaints concerning defects in, or nonconformity
??17

of, the goods delivered within a reasonable period after delivery" is an implied material term because it is the law according to the UCC - a buyer who accepts goods must notify the buyer of their nonconformity within a reasonable period of time after delivery and inspection, and give the breaching seller (if there is a breaching seller) an opportunity to cure the breach.
Conclusion: Because Press sent a written confirmation, which is a reasonable manner of acceptance, and did not vary the terms such that the contract was unenforceable or the terms deficient, there is a valid acceptance by Press.
Breach
Under the UCC and contract law, a breach of contract is the failure of a party to perform when that party's duty to perform is due. A material breach is one in which the non- breaching party is affected so substantially that it will be denied the benefit of the bargain due to the breaching party's non-performance.
Here, Press tendered the goods to Delta because "Press delivered the Model 100 printing presses to Delta's place of business." Delta accepted the goods because "Delta immediately removed its old printing presses and placed two of the new presses in operation." Furthermore, because Delta kept the other printing press and exercised dominion over the goods inconsistent with a rejection of the goods for a period exceeding the reasonable time for their inspection, i. e., "one week after delivery," the facts suggest that acceptance occurred. However, the reason that the 3rd unit was not inspected was not that Delta needed more time to inspect but rather because Delta had no intention of keeping the 3rd unit because Delta said "Delta does not need a 3rd press at this time." Delta was in breach because its duty to perform had become due after Press tendered (delivered) the goods. When Delta said that it did not want the 3rd press, it was saying that it was not going to comply with the original valid contract - that it wasn't going to fulfill its contractual obligations because Delta did not claim that the 3rd unit was defective or nonconformant. Delta was in material breach at the moment that it
?18

said that it wasn't going to pay for the 3rd unit because it didn't need it, because Press' expectation was that it would sell 3 units and receive payment for 3 units. Therefore, it was being denied the benefit of its bargain.
Conclusion: Press is likely to prevail in an action against Delta for breach of contract because Delta and Press entered into a valid contract, and the contract was materially breached by Delta when it unlawfully rejected and refused to pay for the 3rd press because it simply didn't want it. Additionally, Delta is in material breach of contract because it hasn't paid for the presses despite Press's repeated demands.
2. If so, what is the likely measure of damages?
Remedies: Non-Breaching Seller
Under the UCC, a non-breaching seller is entitled to the benefit of the bargain - expectation damages - for a material breach of contract. Also, for an unlimited supplier of goods, the non-breaching seller is entitled to consequential damages or "loss profits" plus incidental damages less any recovery for salvage sale. A non-breaching seller can sell the goods subject to the breach and recover the salvage amount as an offset against its losses. This is the way a non-breaching seller reduces (mitigates) the buyer's damages. Under Hadley v. Baxendale, consequential damages are permitted as long as the loss profits were certain in amount, contemplated by the parties (foreseeable), could not be avoided, and caused by the breach.
The likely measure of damages will be expectation damages because the benefit of the bargain was denied to Press. Press attempted to mitigate damages because it sold the 3rd press to Option (but at a discount - which the UCC allows as long as the sale is conducted in a reasonable commercial manner).
Consequential damages should be awarded because Press is an unlimited volume dealer because "Press maintains a large inventory of the Model 100 printing press
?19

because of its popularity." Press should also be awarded incidental damages, and, finally, the amount of damages should be reduced by the amount that Press collected from Offset. Contract Price (3 @ $25K = $75K-$22K=$53K).
20

Answer B to Question 2
Is Press likely to prevail in an action against Delta for breach of contract and, if
so, what is the likely measure of damages?
PRESS (P) V. DELTA (D)
In order to have any rights, P must show a valid contract under a governing law.
GOVERNING LAW
The UCC governs contracts predominantly involving movable goods, the common law otherwise. Here, the contract is for Model 100 Printing Presses, which are shipped and thus would be a movable good. The UCC will govern this contract.
Merchants
A merchant is one who deals in the goods of the kind or holds himself or his agent out to be skilled in the goods. Here, P is a manufacturer of the presses, and D purchased them for use in its business. Both parties are likely to be considered merchants, thus certain rules apply to these parties in formation.
FORMA TION
A contract is formed where there is mutual assent (offer and acceptance), good consideration, and no valid defense.
???21

Offer
A manifestation of intent to be legally bound by certain definite terms, communicated to an identified offeree or his agent. Here, D ordered three identical Model 100 printing presses from P, thus establishing a reasonable intent to be bound.
Definite Terms
Under the UCC, the offer must contain a description of the goods and quantity. Here, the offer is for three Model 100 printing presses, thus satisfying the good and quantity requirement. As well, a price term was provided: $25,000 each though would not be required as it could be gap-filled if necessary.
Merchant's Firm Offer
A signed offer by a merchant remains open, irrevocably, for a reasonable time not to exceed three months of the time stated. Here, D's written order form described the items ordered by model number.
Identified Offeree
The offeree is D, thus, all the elements of an offer have been satisfied.
D's offer is valid, and is open and irrevocable for three months.
Acceptance
An unequivocal assent to the terms and conditions of the offer, communicated to the offeree or his identified agent. Under the common law, the acceptance had to be a mirror image of the offer. Under the UCC, however, an acceptance may be in any means reasonable under the circumstances as the UCC prefers to find a contract.
?????22

Here, P sent D its own form confirming the order and the confirmation states the identical terms of the offer, with an added term (infra). Where the writings agree, the UCC prefers to find a contract and thus the confirmation is likely an acceptance where the terms agree (the presses and price). However, the memorandum contains that extra term.
Merchants' Confirmatory Memoranda
Between merchants, a signed confirmatory memorandum may be made by a party. Where the confirmation includes additional terms, between merchants, the new term becomes part of the contract unless there exists a proviso in the offeror's offer, the other party objects within a reasonable time, or the term materially alters the agreement.
Here, P sent D its own form confirming the order which establishes a confirmatory memorandum. The memorandum added the term: "Delta must make any complaints concerning defects in, or nonconformity of, the goods delivered within a reasonable period after delivery."
D did not respond to the memorandum and D's original offer contains no ironclad statement that the offer (supra) terms must be expressly consented to; thus, unless the term is material, it becomes part of the contract.
The question is whether this is a material term. D may try to argue that it is a new term and would materially alter the contract, but the argument would be weak. P can argue that the UCC, in general, by the Perfect Tender Rule, requires that a seller send the goods in perfect conformance with the contract (discussed infra). However, even where delivery is tendered and accepted, a party may revoke acceptance upon notice of a defect, and thus the "new term" appears to state more or less what the UCC provides anyway.
?23

On balance, the new term comports well with the UCC, and is not likely [to] be found as a material addition; thus will be added to the contract.
Acceptance by Conduct
While the discussion supra finds the confirmation is likely an acceptance, the UCC (as noted) allows acceptance in any reasonable [form]. Here, P did ship the three presses, and D put two into production. Thus, the parties are conducting themselves in a way to express objective acceptance. The offer has been accepted by P and the term of the memorandum will be added to the contract.
Consideration
The bargained for exchange of mutual binding legal detriment and benefit.
Here, the parties are exchanging presses for money, which is good consideration.
DEFENSES TO FORMATION
Statue of Frauds (SOF)
The SOF requires certain contracts to be in writing to be enforceable. Under the UCC, a contract for goods of value $500 or greater must be in writing and evidence the requisite UCC terms. Here, the contract is for $75,000 total in value, thus is within the statute. Here, both the offer, and, as well, the confirmatory memorandum (supra), the contract evidences the parties, the goods and quantity, and thus, the writings, will satisfy the statute.
??24

Part Performance
Even if the writings are insufficient, the UCC allows a part performance exception in that the contract is enforceable to any performance made. Here, P delivered all three presses; thus the contract would be enforceable anyway.
Unilateral Mistake
Where one party makes a mistake about a material term, and the other party knows or has reason to know of that mistake, the mistaken party may avoid the agreement. Here, D may argue that it mistakenly ordered three presses when it only needed two. P will argue that as a very popular item, and with no notice of such mistake, they could not have known of this mistake. There being no facts to refute P's position, the defense will fail.
Unconsionability
Where the terms of a contract are simply unfair or oppressive, or an adhesion exists, the court may rewrite the contract in any way to make it fair. Here, D may argue that it is unconscionable to force it to spend $25,000 when it does not need such. However, simply misordering without a bona fide good faith mistake that the other party knew about is not likely to be unconscionable; thus the defense should fail.
There being no other valid defense, a contract exists for three presses at $25,000 each with a notice term for defects or otherwise.
MODIFICA TION
Under the UCC, parties may modify the contract so long as the modification was made in good faith, and comports with the statute of frauds.
???25

Here, D told P it did not need the third press when D's VP of Operations notified P's Sales Manager (S). S then replied that all sales were final and that D was obligated to pay for all three. At this point, P has not acquiesced to any modification.
However, when pressed by D who insisted P pick up the third press the next day, S then responded that she would have a truck pick it up, but D was expected to pay for all three. D will argue that in this exchange P has agreed to the modification. P can argue, however, that it did not agree; rather it made clear, through S [an] indication that it expected P to be bound to the original terms.
On balance, there is no modification as P did not accept the terms, simply helped out by picking up a press D did not intend to use (mitigation infra).
Statute of Frauds
Defined supra
There are no indications that the modification was in writing, and if not, it is unenforceable nonetheless as the modified contract (if it were so), is still for value greater then $500 and thus within the statute.
PERFORMANCE
All duties must be performed, and thus, all conditions must be satisfied or excused or a breach occurs.
There being no express conditions, only constructive conditions apply.
?26

Perfect Tender Rule
Under the UCC, a shipment must be perfect in every way per the contract; otherwise the condition of delivery fails. Here, one week later, P delivered the three Model 100 printing presses to D's place of business. There were no notices of defect. The condition is satisfied and thus D's duty to perform becomes absolute.
D's Duty to Pay
D accepted the delivery, most definitely, when it immediately removed its old printing presses and placed two of the new presses into production. By accepting the delivery, D must now pay for the three presses (per the non-modification to the contract [supra]).
Anticipatory Repudiation
Expressly or by conduct a party who repudiates prior to performance such that a reasonable person would construe the repudiation as an intent or inability to perform is an anticipatory repudiation and an immediate breach of contract.
Here, P will argue that [it] stored the third in its original packing, after which D's VP of Operations told P's Sales Manager (S) it wanted to return the third press, telling S that D "doesn't need a third press at this time." The exchange was discussed in modification, supra, and by insisting that P pick up the third press, P will argue that a reasonable person would construe that as clear intent not to completely perform.
D will argue that it thought the contract was modified, but that is a subjective view, not objective.
On balance, a reasonable person would probably find that the statement was a repudiation; thus, D has breached by anticipatory repudiation.
???27

Impracticability
D may raise the defense in that an event, unforeseeable at the time of formation, caused his performance to become impracticable, his duty is discharged. Here, D will argue that the cost was too high due to the over-ordering, thus making his performance impracticable financially. However, P will argue that such is subjective impracticability, not objective in that only D himself could not perform, all others could. The defense will fail, and D has breached.
BREACH
Failure to completely perform is a breach of contract and the ramifications depend on whether the breach is material or partial. Here, D failed to pay even after its breach by anticipatory repudiation, thus may be material breach.
Failure to Perform by Payment
Under the UCC, a failure to pay is a material breach, giving rise to an action in damages. Here, D has not yet paid for the presses despite repeated demands from P, thus has materially breached the contract.
REMEDIES
P may sue in damages against D. Under the UCC, a seller may recover in market price, lost profit, lost volume sale, resale or an action for price.
Expectation Damages
Seeks to place the party in the financial position as if the contract was fully performed.
???28

Market Price Recovery
P may accept a market price recovery in which the recovery is for the difference between the contract price and good faith market resale. Here, P resold the third press for $22,000, which is a $3,000 loss in market between the original contract and the sale. Thus, it could recover on this theory, though there may be a better recovery.
Lost Volume Sale
P should sue for lost volume sale where the seller would essentially be subject to a wash sale had it gone to market, and the chattel is not unique (i.e., is part of a standard volume of sales to others).
Here, P can argue that it resold the third press a week later for $22,000 (a $3,000 loss). Offset is one of the largest printing companies in State X and regularly purchases Model 100 presses from P. P will argue that since it maintains an inventory, given that Model 100 presses due to its popularity, the failed sale to D was a lost volume sale, thus they are entitled to recovery.
The recovery under this model is the lost profit. Here, the cost of goods for the Model 100 is $18,000 and the sale price was $25,000. Under the recovery, P should recover the $7,000 difference for the lost volume sale.
??29

Question 3
At 3 a.m. the City Police Department received a call that there was an unauthorized entry into Walt's Gun Emporium ("Walt's"), a store that sells firearms.
As the police officers drove around a corner behind Walt's to investigate the incident, they observed a man placing something into the trunk of a red car parked across the street from Walt's. The red car's engine was running. When the officers turned the police car's siren and lights on, the red car immediately sped away. One officer exited the police car and arrested Albert, the person who had been standing behind the red car, while the other officer followed the fleeing red car.
The police officer who arrested Albert then saw Burt slide a sealed box labeled "Walt's Gun Emporium" and crawl out of a store window. The officer then arrested Burt. It was later determined that the box contained six rifles.
While being chased by the police, the red car crashed into another car, killing its driver Vic. Chuck, the driver of the red car, was arrested. A sealed box stamped with the words "Walt's Gun Emporium" containing twelve pistols was found in the trunk of the red car.
Albert, Burt, and Chuck were each charged with larceny and murder.
At trial, Walt, the owner of Walt's, testified for the prosecution that Burt was employed by Walt's as a salesperson. Walt also testified that he was the only person working at Walt's authorized to open sealed boxes containing firearms or to remove the boxes from the gun vault where they were stored.
Albert testified that he was given $10 by Chuck to help carry boxes to the red car, and that he had never seen Chuck or Burt before.
Burt testified that he was authorized by Walt's to possess the firearms located at the store in order to fulfill his duties as a salesperson.
Chuck testified that Burt convinced him that Burt owned the guns and that Burt had agreed to sell them to Chuck for $400.
Do the facts support each of the charges against Albert, Burt, and Chuck and what defenses, if any, might they each reasonably assert? Discuss.
30

Crimes of Albert
Answer A to Question 3
?I. Can Albert be charged with larceny?
A. To prevail on the charge of larceny, the prosecution will have to establish the trespass or taking and carrying away the property of another with the intent to permanently deprive. Larceny is a specific intent crime that requires an intent to steal.
1. Trespassorytaking
To prevail, the prosecution will have to show that the taking was trespassory. If we believe Albert's testimony, he was paid $10.00 to help Chuck carry the boxes. To believe the testimony means that Albert didn't know that his taking was trespassory because he could assume that the box belonged to Chuck.
2. Carryingaway
Property must be carried away by the defendant. Even the slightest movement will suffice. Here, Albert clearly carried away the boxes by helping load them onto Chuck's truck.
3. Thepropertymustbeofanother
Defendant must know that the property is of another and he is not authorized to take it. Here, Albert, according to his testimony, believed that the property was belonging to Chuck.
????31

4. Intenttopermanentlydeprive
As discussed above, larceny is a specific intent crime and the prosecution must show that the defendant intended to permanently deprive the rightful owner of the property. If Albert believed Chuck and if we believed his testimony, Albert didn't have an intent to steal.
The prosecution will argue, however, that it was very unusual to be at 3 am on the street and to be further asked by someone to help him load some boxes. A reasonable person would know that the items were stolen. However, reasonableness is not enough. Good faith mistake is enough as a defense for a crime of larceny as long as the jury believes Albert.
B. Vicarious liability
The prosecution will try to establish that Albert is not telling the truth and that he was acting in concert with Burt and Chuck.
1. Accompliceliability
If the prosecution establishes that he had an intent to commit the crime of larceny and that he was aiding and abetting, Albert will be liable for the crime of larceny committed. However, it would have to be first established that larceny is committed - see discussion below. If the prosecution prevails that he had an intent the larceny be committed, Albert's loading the boxes would constitute aiding and abetting. If it is established that larceny in fact took place, Albert will be guilty of larceny.
???32

2. Conspiracy
If the prosecution establishes Albert was in an agreement with either Burt or Chuck to commit a larceny or any unlawful act and if an overt act was committed, then Albert would be guilty of crimes resulting from the conspiracy agreement.
II. CanAlbertbechargedwithmurder?
Albert did not kill Vic. The only way he can be held vicariously liable for the death of Vic is being held responsible either as a conspirator or as a co-felon under felony murder rule - see discussion below.
Crimes of Burt
I. Can Burt be charged with larceny?
Larceny is a crime against possession. Here, Walt testified that Burt was an employee of the Walt's. Generally employees have custody of goods belonging to employer; however, if an employee is in more of a supervisory rank, he will be deemed to have possession. Here, Walt testified that Burt was the only person who had access to the sealed boxes. That would make him more then a regular employee. In addition, Burt testified that he was authorized to possess the firearms pursuant to his employment duties. If it is determined that he had possession, he will not be guilty of larceny. That would be a crime of embezzlement.
However, if it is determined that he only had custody, the prosecution will have to establish:
????33

A. Trespassory taking - Burt clearly didn't have permission to take the gun; therefore, it was trespassory.
B. Carrying away - he clearly carried the goods away when he slid them outside the store.
C. Property of another - he knew that the guns were not his but belonging to Walt's.
D. With intent to steal - the fact that he was doing it at 3 am and that he offered to sell them for $400 could mean that he intended to permanently deprive the true owner.
If he only had custody and if the above elements are established, Burt will be guilty of larceny.
II. CanBurtbechargedwithmurder?
Burt's act didn't kill Vic; the only way to attach liability to Burt is to find him liable as an accomplice, coconspirator or under the felony murder rule. See discussion above and below.
Crimes of Chuck
I. Can Chuck be charged with larceny?
If Chuck's testimony is believed, he didn't have the intent to permanently deprive because he claimed he was buying the guns that he believed belonged to Burt. Facts don't tell us that Chuck took or carried away the guns; therefore, it would be difficult to directly charge him with larceny. However, if his testimony is not
???????34

II.
believed, he will be charged with larceny under either accomplice liability or coconspirator liability.
Can Chuck be charged with murder of Vic?
1. Murderishomicidecommittedwithmalice.
2. Homicide is unlawful killing of another by the defendant's act. Here, Vic died
as a result of Chuck's act of crashing his car.
3. Malice can be established by either an intent to kill, an intent to seriously
injure, wanton conduct, or under felony murder rule. Here, Chuck didn't have an intent to kill anyone. Perhaps his conduct could be considered wanton because he was speeding and driving recklessly but it was 3 am and not many people are expected to be out at that time of the night.
A. Felony murder rule
Under felony murder rule, if death occurred during the commission of a dangerous felony, malice was established. Under common law, all felonies were dangerous but modernly this has been changed to include only inherently dangerous felonies. Larceny is generally not a dangerous felony; however, this larceny included the guns and ammunition and could be considered dangerous.
a. Duringthecommission
Commission of felony includes the perpetration, the commission, and the escape until the felons reach a point of safety. Here, the crime was interrupted by the police and when the police [officer] was chasing Chuck, it was still a part of the felony. Therefore, when Chuck killed Vic, it will most likely be during the commission of a felony and therefore, malice would be established.
???35

4. There don't appear to be any defenses available to Chuck and, therefore, Chuck would be guilty of murder.
5. Degrees - Here, if malice is established under felony murder rule, Chuck will be guilty of murder in [the] first degree. If it will be considered that his conduct was wanton then he will be guilty of second degree murder.
If it is established that malice cannot be proved because felony was not dangerous then Chuck will not be guilty of murder.
If Chuck's testimony is believed, he would not be charged with larceny or murder.
Finally, if it established that Albert, Burt and Chuck were coconspirators and the larceny was committed, then they could all be charged with larceny and murder. If no larceny was committed, then they could not be charged with larceny. If Chuck is found guilty of murder and conspiracy is established, all will be guilty of murder.
?36

Answer B to Question 3
1. State vs. Albert - Do the facts support Albert's charges of larceny and murder and
what defenses might he assert? LARCENY
The trespassory taking and carrying away [of] the personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here, the facts indicate that Albert (A) was "placing something into the trunk of a red car"; thus, there was asportation of the goods. While the facts are silent as to if A actually took the goods, it is reasonable to infer from the facts that A took the box because he was "given $10 by Chuck" to carry the box. After investigation by the police, it was determined that a sealed box containing guns was what was placed in the car. The box had the name "Walt's Gun Emporium," which would indicate that the goods were the personal property of another.
A will argue that because he had not met Chuck or Burt before that, he was unaware that the property belonged to another and that he did not have the intent to permanently deprive. However, the state will argue that reasonable people do not enter gun stores at 3 am and "crawl out of a store window" to retrieve their own goods. Thus, they will likely find the requisite intent to permanently deprive.
Additionally, because of A's likely status of an accomplice, discussed below, whether or not he had the intent to permanently deprive may be found with his intent to assist in the overall crime.
Therefore, it appears that A is guilty of larceny.
???37

MURDER
Homicide with malice aforethought Homicide
The killing of one human being by another
Here, the facts indicate that Vic, a human being, was killed when his car was struck by Chuck, thus by another.
Thus, there is a homicide. Malice aforethought
Malice can be found by an intent to kill, an intent to commit serious bodily injury, wanton conduct, or felony murder.
Here, there are no facts to support that A intended to kill Vic nor did he intend to commit serious bodily injury. Additionally, there are no facts to support wanton conduct. The state will likely have to find the requisite malice via the felony murder.
Felony Murder
During the perpetration of a dangerous felony, someone dies.
Here, the state is charging A with larceny. Larceny is not considered an inherently dangerous felony at common law.
Thus, because the felony murder rule does not apply, the requisite malice may not be available.
?????38

However, if the courts deem A to be an accomplice and either Burt or Chuck are convicted of the murder, then A may be found liable as an accomplice for Vic's murder. Thus, we will continue our analysis for murder.
Causation
The death must be the actual cause (cause in fact) and the proximate cause (legal cause).
It can be said that "but for" A committing the larceny that Vic would not have died as when and how he did. Thus, A is the actual cause.
A person is the direct proximate cause if the death is the natural and probable result of the defendant's actions. Here, it does not appear that A is the direct cause. However, if it is foreseeable that the death may occur, then the person may be found to be the indirect cause. It is foreseeable that if someone is stealing goods from a store and their accomplices begin to take flight that an innocent person may be struck and killed by the fleeing vehicle. Thus, A is the proximate cause.
Therefore, if the requisite malice can be attributed to Burt or Chuck, A may be found liable for the murder of Vic.
ACCOMPLICE
Someone who gives aid or encouragement before or during a crime. The accomplice will be liable for all crimes that were aided to or that are foreseeable.
Here, A will argue that he was not giving aid to commit a crime; rather he was simply doing a small job for compensation. However, the state will argue that reasonable people do not agree to remove guns from a store at 3 am for any price. Further, the facts indicate that Burt crawled out of a store window. A reasonable person in A's position would be able to determine that they were not rightfully able to enter the
??39

premises, [and] that they were likely committing a crime in removing goods in the secrecy of night. Moreover, it was A's intention to assist in the crime because he stated he was receiving compensation for it.
If the state determines that A is guilty as an accomplice, he will be liable for all crimes that are foreseeable. It is foreseeable that while fleeing from the police that people may get injured or even die. Thus, if there is an injury/death that occurs while during the flight, A may be liable for those crimes.
Therefore, it appears that A will be guilty as an accomplice.
2. State vs. Burt - Do the facts support Burt's charges of larceny and murder and what defenses might he assert?
LARCENY
Defined supra
Here, the facts indicate that Burt was observed by the police while he was sliding "a sealed box" from Walt's Gun Emporium and crawling out of a store window. There is sufficient asportation and carrying away personal property that belonged to another, Walt. The question here will turn on whether or not Burt had mere custody or possession. If Burt had possession of the goods, he cannot be charged with larceny but rather embezzlement.
Burt will argue that he had possession because at trial he testified that he "was authorized by Walt's to possess the firearms." However, the state will argue that Burt had mere custody because if he had rightful possession he would not have needed to "crawl" in and out of the window to gain access to the guns. Moreover, it is reasonable to infer that if he had possession he would not have needed to take the guns in the early morning at 3 am. Moreover, Walt testified that only he (Walt) was authorized to open or remove the boxes and that Burt did not have possession. Depending on how the trier of
?40

fact determines Walt's level of possessory interest will depend on if he had the requisite intent to actually steal the goods. It does appear from the facts that he does not have a key to the store and that he has mere custody.
Therefore, if it is determined he only has custody, he will be liable for larceny.
MURDER
Defined supra
Here, as discussed above, the main issue will be with respect to the requisite malice. Under common law, larceny is not an inherently dangerous felony for felony murder. However, if it is determined that Burt is guilty as an accomplice, then he may be convicted for Vic's murder if Chuck is found to have the requisite malice.
Therefore, if Chuck is found to have the requisite malice, Burt may be liable for murder as an accomplice.
ACCOMPLICE Defined supra
As discussed above, Burt will be liable for all crimes that are foreseeable. It is foreseeable that while fleeing from the police that people may get injured or even die. Moreover, Burt was aiding in the theft of the guns from the store as from the discussion above it appears he did not have possession but rather had only custody. Thus, if there is an injury/death that occurs while during the flight, A may be liable for those crimes.
Therefore, it appears that Burt will be guilty as an accomplice.
??41

3. State vs. Chuck - Do the facts support Chuck's charges of larceny and murder and
what defenses might he assert?
LARCENY Defined supra
Here, there are no facts indicating that Chuck actually took any of the goods. However, if it is determined that he is an accomplice to crime of larceny committed by Burt, he may be found liable under accomplice liability.
ACCOMPLICE Defined supra
As discussed above, Chuck will be liable for all crimes that are foreseeable. Chuck will argue that he did not believe he was committing or assisting in committing any crime because he believed he was helping Burt get back his own guns. However, the state will contend that Chuck was aware that the guns did not belong to Burt because they entered through a window and upon the police arriving on the scene Chuck fled. Depending on how the trier of fact views the testimony and the facts will determine if Chuck is liable as an accomplice. However, it appears that Chuck will be liable as an accomplice to larceny.
MURDER Defined supra
Here, the question of murder will turn on if the requisite malice can be found. As discussed above, larceny is not an inherently dangerous crime so felony murder may not be used. However, the court may find malice under wanton conduct.
?????42

Wanton conduct
Consists of an act that creates a high risk of serious injury or death, an act with little or no social value, defendant intended the act.
Here, there is a high risk of death in fleeing from the police and in fact this did occur. Moreover, there is no social value in fleeing from the police, especially if you did not believe you committed a crime. Lastly, it was Chuck's intention to flee from the police as it is likely he believed he would be arrested for stealing the guns.
Thus, there is wanton conduct.
Therefore, because there is the requisite malice, Chuck will be liable for murder.
DEFENSES - MISTAKE OF CIVIL LAW
Mistake of civil law will be a defense if the defendant believed they were rightful in doing the act.
Here, the facts indicate that Chuck believed he was helping Burt get back his own guns. However, from the facts that they broke into the store in the disguise of the early morning coupled with his fleeing from the scene, it does not appear that Chuck truly believed he was helping Burt get back his own property.
Therefore, he will not be able to assert the defense of mistake of civil law.
??43

Question 4
During the late summer, State College of Law held its annual student versus faculty softball game and picnic. The game was hotly contested and, as a result of poor sportsmanship on both sides, tempers flared.
Following the game, the students' team was presented with the winner's trophy, which Abel, the captain of the student team, held aloft. Thinking it would be funny, Charlie, a member of the faculty team, threw a ball at the trophy, striking it and knocking it from Abel's hands. Angrily, Abel picked up the trophy, approached Charlie and said, "If you weren't a professor here, I would take that trophy and stick it in your ear." Charlie, who was physically much bigger than Abel and a former professional boxer, did not feel threatened by Abel's reaction.
Edward, another professor and member of the faculty team, believing that Abel was about to attack Charlie, struck Abel with a baseball bat, resulting in a large bruise to Abel's arm.
1. Under what theory or theories might Charlie bring an action for damages against Abel, what defenses, if any, might Abel assert, and what is the likely result? Discuss.
2. Under what theory or theories might Abel bring an action for damages against Edward, what defenses, if any, might Edward assert, and what is the likely result? Discuss.
44

Charlie v Able
Assault
Answer A to Question 4
??Intentional placing of another in apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive bodily contact
The facts state that Abel picked up the trophy and approached Charlie and said "If you weren't a professor here, I would take that trophy and stick it in your ear." Abel's actions appear to be volitional, and the menace to Charlie appears to be intended. However, a conditional threat can negate intent. Since Abel said "If you weren't a professor here, I'd stick the trophy in your ear," Abel's threat was conditional on Charlie's position as a professor. The conditional nature of the threat may negate the intent required for assault.
The facts state that Charlie was physically much bigger than Abel and also a former professional boxer and that he did not feel "threatened" by Abel's conduct. The test for assault, however, is not fear, but a reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful or offensive bodily contact. If Charlie believed Abel would throw the trophy at him or strike him with the trophy, even if Charlie was not 'afraid' because of his superior physical stature, the apprehension would be sufficient to sustain a claim for assault.
Defenses
Self-Defense?
Abel is permitted to use a reasonable force to repel an attack made against him. Here, the facts state that Charlie threw a ball at a trophy Abel held in his hands. If Abel reasonably believed the ball was meant for him, he would be privileged to defend himself. This seems unlikely, because Charlie thought the thrown ball would be funny, and as a result the threat to Abel had abated. Abel will not be privileged to claim self- defense.
??45

Consent?
If the plaintiff expressly or impliedly consented to the behavior by the defendant, the defendant will not be liable. Here, the facts state that the students and professors were engaged in a hotly contested softball game. During sporting events, some bad sportsmanship can be expected. Continued participation in the event will imply consent on the part of the participants to receive and administer the results of bad sportsmanship. However, the threat took place after the end of the game, and a reasonable person in Charlie's position would not impliedly consent to threats made after the game. The defense of consent will not be available to Abel.
Intentional infliction of emotional distress
Extreme and outrageous conduct by the defendant calculated to cause, and which does cause, extreme emotional distress.
The facts state Abel said "If you weren't a professor, I'd stick this trophy in your ear." While in some circumstances that could be construed as extreme and outrageous, given the context in which the events transpired Abel's actions will not rise to the level of extreme and outrageous.
Abel will not be liable to Charlie for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Damages
Since Charlie did not feel threatened and sustained no injuries, he will likely be awarded only nominal damages.
???46

Abel v Edward
Assault Defined supra
The facts do not indicate that Abel was aware the blow from the baseball bat was coming. Without actual apprehension, Abel will not be able to sustain a claim of assault.
Battery
Intentional harmful or offensive bodily contact without consent
The facts state that Edward believed Abel was going to attack Charlie, and also that Edward struck Abel with a baseball bat. Edward's conduct of swinging the bat appears to be volitional and the result of striking Abel with the bat intended, and Edward was apparently trying to stop an attack.
Being struck with a baseball bat can only be construed as a harmful bodily contact.
As discussed supra, everyone on the scene had just participated in a softball game in which tempers flared. While continued participation in the game would imply consent to some bad sportsmanship, the consent would not extend to being struck on purpose by a baseball bat. Abel did not consent to the attack.
Defenses
Defenses of others
One is justified in using reasonable force to repel an attack on another. Majority rule: alter ego rule - the defendant must step in the shoes of the 'victim' of the attack. Here,
?????47

the facts state that Charlie had thrown the ball at Abel while Abel held the trophy. Since Charlie was the aggressor in the altercation between himself and Abel, he would not be privileged to defend himself. Further, as discussed supra, the threat to Charlie was conditional and Charlie was not in any real danger. Since Charlie would not be privileged to defend himself in the situation, in majority rule jurisdictions Edward would not be privileged to defend Charlie. No mistake, however reasonable, is permitted.
Minority rule: the modern trend is to allow a reasonable mistake. If the situation presented itself to Edward, and he reasonably believed Abel represented a threat to Charlie, Edward would be privileged to use reasonable force to repel the attack. Here, the facts state that Charlie is much bigger than Abel and that Edward used a baseball bat. Even if Edward was privileged to come to Charlie's defense through a reasonable mistake, the use of a baseball bat in this situation is not reasonable. Edward will not be able to assert the defense of others' defense.
Damages
General damages
Pain and suffering by Abel resulting from the injury.
Abel will recover general damages from Edward.
Special damages
Specifically accountable expenditures incurred by Abel.
Abel will recover doctor's bills, lost wages, etc., as special damages for all expenditures he can specifically account for.
???48

Punitive damages
Where the defendant is reckless and wanton in his behavior, the plaintiff will recover punitive damages.
Since Edward used a baseball bat on a diminutive person with no available defenses, Abel will likely recover punitive damages.
?49

1. Charlie v. Abel
Assault
Answer B to Question 4
?Assault is defined as intentionally placing the person of another in reasonable apprehension of an immediate battery without consent or legal justification.
The facts tell us that after Charlie threw a ball at the trophy held by Abel, Abel became angry and approached Charlie. The fact that Abel said, "If you weren't a professor here, I would take that trophy and stick it in your ear" indicates a possible intent on the part of Abel to batter Charlie.
In order to determine whether this statement by Abel to Charlie constituted assault we must analyze whether or not the words were intended to place Charlie in reasonable apprehension of an immediate battery.
Due to the fact that Abel qualified his statement by stating, "If you weren't a professor here" indicates that although he may have a desire to take the trophy and stick it in Charlie's ear, that he would only do so if Charlie was not a professor there. Since Charlie was a member of the faculty team it can be deduced that he was a professor at Abel's school.
Inasmuch as the facts also tell us that Charlie was physically much bigger than Abel, was a former professional boxer, and "did not feel threatened by Abel's reaction" it can be concluded that Charlie was not placed in reasonable apprehension of an immediate battery.
Abel will likely argue that his statement to Charlie which indicated that if he "wasn't a professor there he would take the trophy and stick it in his ear," specifically precluded
50

him from acting. In fact he was a professor there; thus, no actual words were stated which would cause a reasonable person to be in fear of an immediate battery.
Charlie would not prevail in an action against Abel for assault.
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Intentional infliction of emotional distress is defined as outrageous conduct which is intended to and does cause severe emotional suffering.
The question here is whether or not the statement made by Abel to Charlie was sufficient in nature to constitute outrageous conduct. The fact that the conversation between Abel and Charlie came after a "hotly contested" softball game in which there was "poor sportsmanship on both sides" and "tempers flared" serves to place the actions of Abel into context in determining what was reasonable under the circumstances.
It is reasonable under the conditions described that Abel would be upset at Charlie's actions of throwing a ball at the trophy held by Abel, which served to knock it from his hands. Thus, the fact that Abel angrily picked up the trophy and approached Charlie making the statement previously described is not outrageous conduct under the circumstances.
The facts tell us that Charlie "did not feel threatened by Abel's reaction" and there are no facts to indicate that Charlie suffered any type of emotional suffering.
Charlie would be unsuccessful in an action against Abel for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
?51

2. Abel v. Edward
Assault
Assault is defined as intentionally placing the person of another in reasonable apprehension of an immediate battery.
Battery
Battery is defined as harmful or offensive touching of the person of another without consent or legal justification.
In this case Edward "struck Abel with a baseball bat," which resulted in a large bruise on Abel's arm. The contact between the bat which was being held by Edward and Abel's arm was sufficient to satisfy the element of a touching of the person of another.
The touching was harmful in nature as evidenced by the large bruise it caused on Abel's arm. At no point in the fact pattern does it indicate that Abel consented to being hit with the bat by Edward; however, there may be some evidence of legal justification which will be asserted by Edward in defense of the action.
The question as to whether or not an assault occurred rests with whether or not Abel saw Edward swing the bat at him prior to it making contact with his arm. There are no facts which indicate that Abel saw Edward swing the bat at him prior to contact. In fact, the facts support that at the time that Edward swung the bat striking Abel on the arm that Abel was involved in a heated conversation with Charlie. The exchange was occurring after the game in which "tempers flared." Thus, it is likely to deduce, absent any facts to the contrary, that Abel did not see Edward swing the bat at him while he was engaged in conversation with Charlie.
Therefore, Abel would not have a cause of action against Edward for assault.
??52

Defense to Battery
Edward will likely assert a defense which rests on the notion that his actions were in defense of Charlie.
Defense of Others
There is a jurisdictional split on whether or not a person may step in to defend another in a situation such as the one presented in this case.
In the majority of jurisdictions one may step in and defend another if they believe that the person is in need of protection. In these jurisdictions the courts rely on the reasonable person's standard; that is, would a reasonable person in [the] same or similar circumstances have reacted similarly?
In the minority of jurisdictions a different approach is taken. Here, the person who steps into a situation to defend another stands in the shoes of the person to whom they have come to aid. Therefore, a person would only have the right to defend the person if the person had the right to defend themself.
In both cases the person providing assistance or defending another must use reasonable force short of a breach of the peace.
In this case, Charlie did not maintain the right to defend himself from Abel's words by hitting him in the arm with a bat. Thus, in the minority of jurisdictions Edward's defense would fail.
??53

If this were heard in a majority jurisdiction Edward's actions would be based on a reasonable person's standard. Inasmuch as Abel made no direct threat to Charlie, Charlie was larger in size and not threatened himself by Abel's actions, it is not reasonable for Edward to believe that Abel was about to attack Charlie.
Therefore, Abel will prevail in an action against Edward for battery.
54


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2009
California First-Year Law Students' Examination

?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/ Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 1149 South Hill Street . Los Angeles, CA 90015-2299 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
OCTOBER 2009 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2009 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
????Question Number
1.
2.
3.
4.
Subject Page
Torts 3
Criminal Law 12
Contracts 28
???Torts
45
1

?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/ Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 1149 South Hill Street . Los Angeles, CA 90015-2299 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
???2

Question 1
Darby organized a political rally attended by approximately 1,000 people in support of a candidate challenging the incumbent in the upcoming mayoral election. Sheila, the wife of the challenging candidate, was the main speaker. When Darby introduced Sheila, he described her as a ". . .kind woman of the people." In his introduction he also referred to Patty, the wife of the current mayor, as ". . . a snob, who is so cutthroat that she said very nasty things about her closest friend when that friend applied for membership to an exclusive private women's club of which Patty is a member." Darby's statements were reported in the print and television media.
Darby had heard this information about Patty from a notorious local gossip and the information was largely false. In fact, when Patty's friend was rejected for club membership, Patty was one of her staunchest supporters in the application process. Darby's statement put a strain on Patty's relationship with her friend who, upon hearing of Darby's comments, cancelled an upcoming lunch she and Patty had scheduled several weeks before the rally.
At the time Darby spoke at the rally, Patty had not been involved publicly in her husband's campaign or political activities. Two days before the rally, Patty appeared with her husband in public for the first time when she learned that Sheila was going to speak at the rally.
1. Under what theory, or theories, if any, might Patty bring an action against Darby? Discuss.
2. What defense or defenses, if any, might Darby assert, and what is the likely result? Discuss.
3

DEFAMATION
Answer A to Question 1
PATTY V. DARBY
??Defamation is a false and defamatory statement published to third persons, understood by those third persons as relating to Plaintiff, which actually and proximately causes damage to Plaintiff's reputation.
FALSITY: Darby stated that Patty was a "snob," that she said "nasty things" about her friend when her friend applied for membership in a club.
OPINION: Darby's statement that Patty was a snob was his own opinion. It does not relate to a factual matter.
FACT: Darby's statement about Patty's interfering with her friend's application for the club is false because it relates to an event that did not actually occur.
Darby may state that he heard the information from someone else and was merely republishing it. However, because the person he heard this information from was a "notorious gossip," Darby will be found to have known that it was at least highly possible that the information was not accurate.
DEFAMATORY: Darby stated that Patty had actively interfered with a friend's club membership by saying "nasty things" and was snobby. These statements would be understood by anyone to be tending to lower the reputation of the one to whom they referred. Therefore the statements are defamatory.
PUBLISHED TO THIRD PERSONS: Darby's statements were made in front of an audience of 1,000 people. Therefore they were published.
???4

UNDERSTOOD TO BE ABOUT PLAINTIFF: The people at the rally understood that Darby was speaking of Patty the Mayor's wife. Therefore his comments could not be understood to be about another woman named Patty, but only about this particular woman.
CAUSATION: But for Darby's statements to the people at the rally, Patty would not have suffered the loss in reputation that she suffered. Furthermore, it was foreseeable that making these defamatory statements in the public arena would cause a substantial number of people to believe the statements and therefore that the Plaintiff's reputation would be lowered in the estimation of a sizable portion of the attendees.
DAMAGE TO REPUTATION: Patty's reputation was at least lowered in the estimation of the friend whose club membership she had actually supported. Because this friend had been rejected for membership and because she now believed that Patty was the result of that rejection, Friend cancelled her lunch with Patty.
The courts will see even the loss of a gratuity, such as a lunch, as damages in relation to defamation. Therefore Patty has suffered sufficient loss of reputation for defamation to lie.
LIABILITY FOR REPUBLICATION
The original tortfeasor will be liable for all the damage caused by republishers.
Here, Darby's statements were republished by the print and television media. Because these media have substantial viewers and readers, Patty's damages will be seen to have been aggravated by the republication. Patty's damages can be assessed by means of polls or other measures.
Darby will be liable for all damages subsequently proven by Patty to have been sustained by her as a result of the republications.
????5

DEFENSES TO DEFAMATION
Constitutional Defenses
Public Figure:
Darby will argue that Patty was a public figure because she was the mayor's wife and this was an election year. Darby will state that because Patty was a public figure, he should only be held liable if his statements were made with actual malice, that is, intentionally or in reckless disregard of the truth.
The court may determine that Patty's status as the mayor's wife is one of public figure. However, because Darby's information came from a "notorious gossip," the court will likely find that Darby should have known that the information was probably false. It is likely that he will be found to have acted at least recklessly in relation to the truth of the statements he made. Therefore, this defense will not be applicable.
Private Figure in Public Matter
Patty will argue that she was not a public figure, that her husband handled the mayoral duties without her, and that she led a quiet life unrelated to her husband's job. However, because she had joined her husband at a political rally two days before the rally at which Darby spoke, the court may find that she had assumed the status of a private figure in a public matter in relation to the current election.
If the court finds that Patty is a private figure in a public matter, Darby will state that his statements relating to Patty's alleged treatment of her friend are within the scope of public interest in the election of a mayor. Patty will argue that Darby exceeded the limits of Gertz in that his false, defamatory statements were made at least negligently, most likely recklessly, and perhaps even intentionally.
This defense will not work.
????6

Darby will be liable for defamation.
Damages:
Special Damages: Patty lost the lunch she was going to have with her friend.
General Damages: Because Patty can prove special damages, she can recover for mental suffering and loss of reputation in the community. She will recover from Darby for all losses sustained through the subsequent republication by the print and television media as well.
Punitive Damages: Patty will probably be able to prove that Darby's statements were made maliciously. Therefore punitive damages will be available.
INTENTIONAL INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS
Conduct of an extreme and outrageous nature that intentionally or recklessly causes severe emotional distress to Plaintiff.
Darby accused Patty of saying nasty things about her friend. His statements were made in front of 1,000 people. Having such a statement made about one in front of such a large group could be found to be extreme and outrageous. Furthermore, Darby made his statements intentionally. Darby will argue that words alone are insufficient to support IIED, but Patty will counter that the statements were so outrageous that they were certain to cause emotional distress, especially when made in front of such a large group of people.
Patty will have to prove that she suffered severe emotional distress because of the loss of her friend or other embarrassment. If she does prove severe emotional distress, the court may find Darby liable for IIED.
?????7

Defenses:
Darby will argue that his conduct was not extreme, or that it was uttered as an opinion. However, if the court finds it extreme and outrageous and that Patty suffered severe emotional distress, this will not be a good defense.
INTENTIONAL INTERFERENCE WITH PROSPECTIVE BUSINESS ADVANTAGE
Defendant intentionally interferes with Plaintiff's prospective business advantage.
Here, Darby made the statements about Patty in an intentional effort to induce the local voters to vote against Patty's husband for mayor. Thus, because the business advantage in view is that of Patty's husband, rather than Patty, it is unlikely that Darby would be liable for intentional interference with prospective business advantage.
??8

I. Patty v. Darby
Answer B to Question 1
Defamation. Patty may assert a claim against Darby for defamation.
Defamation is a defamatory statement concerning the plaintiff, published to a third party, causing reputational harm.
Defamatory Statement. A defamatory statement is a false statement adversely affecting the reputation of the plaintiff in the eyes of a respectable minority of the community. Here, Darby referred to Patty as "a snob, who is so cutthroat that she said very nasty things about her closest friend when that friend applied for membership to an exclusive private women's club of which Patty is a member." This statement was "largely false," as Patty had been one of her friend's staunchest supporters in the application process. It adversely affected Patty's reputation because it put a strain on her relationship with her friend, who believed the false statement upon hearing Darby's statements. Therefore the statement was defamatory.
Of and concerning plaintiff. The Plaintiff must be understood to be the subject of the defamatory statement, either by intrinsic or extrinsic evidence. Here, Darby referred to Patty, the wife of the current mayor, in his introduction of Sheila. It clearly identified Patty by name, and it is therefore of and concerning the plaintiff.
Published to a third party. The defamatory statement must have been communicated to a third party, either intentionally or negligently, and it must have been understood by the third party. Here, Darby made the statement at a political rally attended by approximately 1,000 people, and it was also reported in the print and television media. Darby knew that people would hear his statements, and desired that they hear them, as he was trying to challenge the incumbent during the mayoral election by speaking negatively about the current mayor's wife. He must have also known that the media
9

would be present, and would report what he said. There was clearly an intentional publication.
Constitutional Limitations. The level of fault needed to establish defamation depends on the status of the plaintiff and the defendant. Here, Darby is a non-media defendant. If Patty is a public figure, then it must be shown that Darby acted with malice. If Patty is a private figure, and the matter is a public concern, then it must be shown that Darby acted with malice. If Patty is a private figure, and the matter is a private concern, then it must only be shown that Darby was negligent. Here, Patty had not been publicly involved in her husband's campaign or public activities. This would make her a private figure. However, she had appeared in public for the first time two days before the rally. As she made her appearance when she learned that the wife of the challenging candidate would appear, then Patty's appearance was made in connection with her husband's campaign, making it a matter of public concern. Therefore, Darby would need to have acted with malice.
Malice. Malice is knowledge of the falsity of the statement or reckless disregard to the truth. Here, Darby heard the information about Patty's nasty statements about her friend from a notorious local gossip. This was not a reliable source of information, and the probability that the information was false was very high. Darby would have needed to verify the truth of the information. The facts don't indicate that he did, and therefore he acted with reckless disregard for the truth. Therefore, Darby acted with the requisite malice.
Damages.
Slander. Slander is a defamatory statement which is spoken. Here, as stated above, Darby's statements were spoken. Where there is slander, then the plaintiff needs to prove special damages, or pecuniary losses. Pecuniary losses are monetary, such as loss of income or loss of an expected gift. Here, Patty's relationship with her friend was strained as a result of the defamation, and her friend cancelled an upcoming lunch
10

which had been scheduled weeks before the rally. This is not sufficient to establish that Patty suffered any monetary losses. Patty would not be able to recover absent a showing of such losses. However, where a defendant has acted with malice, then special damages are presumed. Here, as established above, Darby acted with malice, and therefore Patty could recover for the harm suffered.
Defenses. Darby may not be held liable if he can establish a defense.
Absolute privilege. One who makes a defamatory statement during the course of a political campaign is privileged as long as they did not act with intent. Here, Darby acted with intent, and therefore would not avail of the privilege.
Invasion of Privacy. Patty may also assert a claim against Darby for one of the invasion of privacy torts. Here, she may assert a claim for false light.
False light. False light is the intentional falsifying of a plaintiff's beliefs or actions, which would be highly offensive to a reasonable person, and which is widely published. Here, as discussed under defamation, Darby intentionally made a false statement about Patty. The statement falsely reported on an action which Patty did not do - said nasty things about her friend. It was widely published, as it was reported in the print and television media. Such a statement would be highly offensive to a reasonable person because it was damaging to a personal relationship. Therefore Darby would be liable for false light.
Defenses. There are no applicable defenses.
11

Question 2
Vladimir owed Donald a gambling debt. Knowing that Vladimir had a new laptop computer, Donald sent an e-mail to Brenda, who lived close to Vladimir. The e-mail informed Brenda that Donald had left his laptop at the home of Vladimir, who was away for the weekend, but that Vladimir had given Donald permission to retrieve his laptop while Vladimir was gone. In the e-mail Donald asked Brenda to go to Vladimir's house, locate the door key under the mat on the porch, and bring the laptop to Donald.
Corky, who was at Brenda's house when Donald sent the e-mail to her, read the e-mail and rushed over to Vladimir's house to steal the laptop. When Brenda later arrived at Vladimir's house to retrieve the laptop for Donald, she found the back door open and Corky ransacking the house. Corky was so startled that he fell backwards, hit his head on a table and lost consciousness as he fell to the floor. Brenda went upstairs where she searched for and found the laptop. Always wanting a laptop, she put Vladimir's laptop in her purse to keep for herself. Brenda then called 911. Before the police arrived, Corky regained consciousness and fled out the back door.
When the police arrived at Vladimir's house, Brenda told them that she believed Corky had taken a laptop from the house. When the police went to Corky's house, they found him dead from his head injury.
What crimes, if any, might Donald, Brenda and Corky reasonably be charged with, and what defenses, if any, might each assert? Discuss.
12

Answer A to Question 2
STATE V. DONALD
SOLICITATION OF BRENDA
An act of inciting, enticing, or counseling of another, with specific intent to induce them to commit a crime.
Donald e-mailed Brenda and asked her to retrieve his laptop from Vladimir's house.
This is an act of inciting and counseling of another, Brenda, to commit a crime.
However, Donald will argue that Brenda's act would not be a crime because she would not be intending to permanently deprive Vladimir of Vladimir's laptop.
However, State will show that this would be a crime as to Donald, because Donald would be committing a burglary by an innocent agent.
Thus, Donald incited Brenda to commit an illegal act, burglary.
Thus, Donald is guilty of solicitation of Brenda, absent an applicable defense.
SOLICITATION OF CORKY
Defined supra.
Donald e-mailed Brenda and, as discussed supra, solicited her to commit burglary.
However, Donald did not intend to solicit Corky, and further, he did not know that she was even present at Brenda's house.
???13

Thus, Donald did not solicit Corky with intent to induce her to commit a crime.
Thus, Donald is not guilty of solicitation of Corky.
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT LARCENY/BURGLARY
An agreement between two or more persons to commit an illegal act.
State will argue that Donald agreed with Brenda and Corky to commit burglary.
However, Donald only solicited Brenda, and did not have any agreement with either Brenda or Corky.
Thus, Donald is not guilty of conspiracy.
ATTEMPTED COMMON LAW BURGLARY
Attempt: The substantial step towards perpetration of an intended crime
Common Law Burglary: The breaking and entering of the dwelling of another, in the nighttime, with specific intent to commit a felony therein.
Donald attempted to have Brenda commit a burglary of Vladimir's house. However, as discussed infra, Brenda did not commit a common law burglary because there was no breaking.
Donald succeeded in having Brenda commit an entering of the dwelling of Vladimir, with specific intent to commit a felony therein - larceny.
This is a substantial step toward perpetration of an intended crime, burglary.
??14

Thus, Donald is guilty of attempted common law burglary, absent an applicable defense.
MODERN LAW BURGLARY
Modern Law Burglary: The trespassory entering of any structure with specific intent to commit a crime therein.
Donald succeeded in having Brenda commit a trespassory entering of the structure of Vladimir when she entered without his permission, and with specific intent to commit the crime of larceny therein.
Donald will argue that Brenda did not herself intend to commit larceny, and there is no concurrence.
However, State will show that Brenda was an innocent agent, and thus, Donald can still be convicted.
Thus, Donald is guilty of modern law burglary, absent an applicable defense.
LARCENY
The trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with specific intent to permanently deprive.
Here, Donald used Brenda as an innocent agent to take Vladimir's laptop.
Donald knew that this was a trespassory taking and carrying away because Brenda was going to take it and carry it to him, without Vladimir's consent.
??15

Further, this was the personal property of Vladimir, another, and Donald intended to permanently deprive Vladimir of the laptop.
Thus, Donald is guilty of larceny, absent an applicable defense.
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
State will argue that Donald should be guilty of homicide of Corky under accomplice liability for the acts of Brenda.
However, Donald will show that, as discussed infra, Brenda was not guilty of the death of Corky.
Thus, Donald is not guilty of homicide.
Finally, as discussed infra, if the court were to determine that Brenda is guilty of involuntary manslaughter, Donald would still not be guilty because he did not specifically aid and abet the crime of homicide.
Defenses Donald can raise to the above crimes
There are no defenses which Donald can raise to the above crimes.
STATE V. BRENDA
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT LARCENY
As discussed supra, there was no agreement.
Thus, Brenda is not guilty.
????16

COMMON LAW BURGLARY
Defined supra.
Brenda entered Vladimir's house through the open door.
This is not a breaking.
Thus, although Brenda committed an entering of the dwelling of another, there is no breaking, no nighttime, and no specific intent to commit a felony therein.
Brenda is not guilty of common law burglary.
MODERN LAW BURGLARY
Defined supra.
Brenda entered Vladimir's house without his permission. This is a trespassory entering.
Vladimir's house is the structure of another.
However, Brenda did not intend to commit a crime therein at the time she entered, because she thought that the laptop was actually Donald's, and it wouldn't be stealing to take it.
Thus, Brenda is not guilty.
??17

LARCENY
Defined supra.
Brenda took the laptop, intending to keep it for herself.
This is a taking and Brenda carried it away by picking it up.
It was personal property of Vladimir, another.
Further, Brenda intended to permanently deprive the owner of the laptop of it.
Thus, Brenda is guilty absent an applicable defense.
HOMICIDE
The killing of a human being by another human being.
Brenda walked into Vladimir's house, causing Corky to fall over and die.
ACTUAL CAUSE
But for Brenda entering Vladimir's house, Corky would not have been startled and died.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
State will argue that it is reasonably foreseeable that entering the house of another without permission will cause another to die.
However, Brenda will show that she was not committing any crime by entering, as discussed supra, and it is not foreseeable that merely entering another's house without permission will cause someone to die.
??18

Thus, there is no proximate cause.
However, even if the court were to find proximate cause, Brenda would still not be guilty because she did not have any intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily injury, a depraved heart act, and the killing did not occur during commission of a felony.
Further, she did not act with criminal negligence, intent to inflict non-serious bodily injury, or through commission of a misdemeanor because there is no crime for simply trespassing.
Finally, if the court were to find that it is a misdemeanor to commit a trespass on another's land, Brenda would be guilty of involuntary manslaughter because the killing occurred during commission of an unlawful act.
Defenses Brenda can assert against the above crimes
Mistake of fact
Brenda will argue that she was mistaken as to the fact of whose laptop she was taking.
Although this is generally not a valid defense, it will be if it negates the specific intent for any crime.
Here, this is a valid defense to all of the above crimes except the larceny, because it does not make a difference whose laptop Brenda thought she was stealing when she actually stole it.
Thus, this is a defense to most of the crimes, but not the larceny.
?19

STATE V. CORKY
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT LARCENY
As discussed supra, there was no agreement.
Thus, Corky is not guilty.
COMMON LAW BURGLARY
Defined supra.
The facts do not state exactly how Corky entered the house; however, it is likely that Corky broke into it through the back door, because Vladimir was gone, and he likely locked the door.
Thus, there is likely a breaking, and Corky then entered.
This was the dwelling house of Vladimir, another.
Further, Corky intended to steal the laptop, a larceny, which is a felony, at the time he entered.
Thus, Corky is guilty of common law burglary.
MODERN LAW BURGLARY
Defined supra.
Corky trespassorily entered the structure of another, Vladimir, because he did not have Vladimir's permission to enter.
????20

At the time Corky entered, he intended to commit the crime of larceny therein.
Thus, Corky is guilty of modern law burglary.
MALICIOUS MISCHIEF
The malicious infliction of injury to the property of another.
Here, Corky ransacked Vladimir's house. Ransacking a house generally involves causing injury to the house or the property therein, which was the property of Vladimir, another.
This was malicious, because Corky intended to do it and acted recklessly in acting thus.
Thus, Corky is guilty of malicious mischief.
ATTEMPTED LARCENY
Defined supra.
Corky wished to steal Vladimir's laptop. He acted in perpetration of this intent when he burglarized his home and ransacked the house looking for the laptop,
This is a substantial step towards actually taking the laptop because he had specific intent to take it, there was no legal or factual impossibility, he had the apparent ability to succeed, and he acted towards perpetration of an intended larceny.
Thus, Corky is guilty of attempted larceny.
??21

Defenses Corky can raise to the above crimes
There are no defenses which Corky can raise to the above crimes.
?22

I. State vs. Donald:
Answer B to Question 2
The state could reasonably charge Donald with the crimes of solicitation, conspiracy, and as an accomplice.
Solicitation?
Solicitation is the crime of asking or encouraging another to commit a crime and having the specific intent that the crime be committed. Here, the facts show that Donald was attempting to recover on a gambling debt owed to him by Vladimir, (hereinafter "V"), and in turn submitted an e-mail to Brenda who lived close to "V" asking that she go to his home and secure a laptop while "V" was not at home. Knowing that he did not have lawful possession of this laptop he requested that Brenda assist him in committing larceny. His asking of Brenda to participate in this act would merge into the completed offense and, therefore, he would be guilty of solicitation.
Conspiracy? Where two or more parties agree to commit a crime. Under the common law approach there had to be two guilty minds in order for the defendant to be guilty of conspiracy. The more MPC approach is that a defendant can be guilty of this crime with a unilateral decision to commit a crime even if the other party did not agree. Here, the facts show that Donald sent an e-mail to Brenda asking her to secure the laptop from "V"'s home using a key that was under the doormat on the porch and to bring it to him. Prior to Brenda reading the e-mail Corky read the e-mail and rushed over to "V"'s home to steal the laptop. There is no indication here that Donald had any agreement with Corky to steal the laptop, committing a larceny or burglary of "V"'s home. There are facts, however, to support that after reading the e-mail from Donald, Brenda rushed over to "V"'s home to secure the laptop for Donald; however, once she arrived and located the laptop she placed the laptop in her purse, intending to keep it for herself. This was not the agreement she held with Donald, as she wanted to keep this laptop for herself. There is no indication that Brenda ever responded to Donald's request and she simply reacted to the e-mail presented. Under the common law approach there would
23

be no conspiracy between Donald and Brenda or Donald and Corky as they did not agree to commit either the crime of larceny or burglary prior to commencing upon each act.
Accomplice to Larceny or Burglary?
An accomplice is one who aids, abets or encourages the committing of a crime and has the intent that the crime be committed. One who is considered as an accomplice could be charged with the same crimes and the principal offender. Here, Donald would likely be considered an accomplice to the crimes of larceny and burglary.
Burglary: Under common law, burglary was the breaking and entering of the dwelling place of another, at night, with the intent to commit a felony therein. The more modern majority has removed the at night and dwelling house requirements for this crime.
Breaking and entering?
Here, the facts show that Donald advised in his e-mail that the key to "V"'s home would be under the mat on the porch. While this would grant entry into the home, this entry would still be considered unlawful as none of the parties involved had prior authority to enter "V"'s home. The facts also show that Corky used this key to open the back door of the home and was later found ransacking the house in an attempt to locate this laptop. This would satisfy the breaking and entering components under either the common or modern view of burglary.
Felony therein?
The second component to the burglary crime is that of committing a felony therein. Here, the facts show that Corky, using information provided by Donald, rushed over to "V"'s home to steal the laptop. This would amount to a larceny, which would be considered a felony, thus satisfying the second component of burglary.
Larceny: This is the trespassory taking and carrying away [of] the property of another with the intent to permanently deprive. Here, the facts show that as Donald advised in
24

his e-mail that his intent was to have Brenda remove (trespassory taking) the laptop owned by "V" (property of another) while he was out. Donald's intent was to use this laptop as compensation for an outstanding gambling debt owed to him (permanently deprive).
Therefore, if Donald is found to be guilty as an accomplice he can be reasonably charged with the crimes of burglary and larceny.
Defenses:
Consent would be a valid defense that Donald could present to these charged crimes as the facts show that he was owed an outstanding gambling debt. This defense would only be valid if it were true that "V" had made a prior agreement with Donald that the laptop would be a valid exchange for his outstanding debt. There are no facts here to support this; therefore, consent would not likely be a valid defense for Donald.
II. State vs. Brenda:
Conspiracy? Please see definition supra. Here, as the facts show Brenda did receive Donald's e-mail and immediately went over to "V"'s home, where she searched for and found the laptop. As Brenda intended to keep the laptop for herself and there is no indication that she and Donald ever came to an actual agreement that she would commit the crimes of burglary or larceny and turn over the laptop to Donald. Therefore, under majority rules where two guilty minds are required Brenda would not be guilty of conspiracy.
Burglary? Please see the definition supra. Here, the facts show that Brenda later arrived at "V"'s house to find the back door open. She did enter the home which would satisfy the entering element of burglary; however, since the home was open there would be no breaking of an entry. In addition the facts show that Brenda was going to secure the laptop for Donald and later decided to keep the laptop for herself. Since it was not conclusive from the facts that she intended to commit a felony prior to entering the
25

home, and there was no breaking of an entry, Brenda would likely not be found guilty if charged with the crime of burglary.
Larceny? Please see definition supra. Here, the facts show that after arriving Brenda went upstairs and searched for the laptop owned by "V" (property of others). She placed the laptop in her purse, intending to keep it for herself, as she always wanted one (intent to deprive) and left "V"'s home (trespassory taking and carrying away). If Brenda is charged with the crime of larceny she would likely be found guilty of the same as the elements required have been satisfied.
Accomplice? Please see definition supra. Here, the facts show that Brenda, after taking the laptop, called the police and informed the police that she believed Corky had taken the laptop from "V"'s home. These actions would constitute Brenda as being an accessory after the fact, as she continued to aid and abet the potential crimes of burglary and larceny after notifying the police.
Murder? Murder is defined as a homicide or killing of a human being with malice aforethought. Malice can be determined by the intent to kill, the intent to seriously injure, depraved heart or reckless indifference for human life, or a murder that takes place during the commission of an inherently dangerous felony. Here, the facts show that Corky died after the events of the night took place. Burglary of a home would be considered an inherently dangerously activity and therefore the malice element could be inferred upon Brenda for a death that occurred during this act. In order for the felony murder malice element to be satisfied it must be shown that the death of Corky was foreseeable, the death occurred during the commission of the felony, and the defendants had not reached a point of safety. Here, the facts show that upon her arrival to the home Corky was in the process of ransacking the place. He was startled by Brenda's arrival, fell and suffered a head injury as a result. Prior to Brenda leaving, Corky regained consciousness and fled the scene. He was later found dead at his home upon the police arrival. There is no indication from the facts that if charged with murder that Brenda did anything to participate in this homicide of Corky as when she
26

saw him he was alive and either ransacking or fleeing the area. Therefore, a charge of the murder of Corky would not likely be a valid charge against Brenda.
Defenses?
Mistake: A good faith and reasonable mistake may absolve the defendant of all liability. Here, the facts show that Brenda was informed via e-mail that "V" had given permission to Donald to secure his laptop while he was out. She was also informed where to locate the laptop in the home as well as where to locate the key. This may appear as a reasonable mistake, however not in good faith as upon her arrival to the home she saw that Corky, who was at her home, was ransacking the place. This would have given her reasonable inference that it was possible that permission was not granted and therefore she would not have continued forward with the taking of the laptop. Therefore, this would not be a valid defense for Brenda.
III. State vs. Corky
Conspiracy? Please see definition supra. Here, there are no facts to support that Donald had any agreement with Corky. Therefore a charge of conspiracy against Corky would not likely prevail for the state.
Burglary? Please see definition supra. Here the facts show that Corky took the information provided in the e-mail, he rushed over to V's home to steal the laptop, he used the key to open the door of V's home and enter with the intent to deprive him of the laptop. This would satisfy all of the elements required for burglary and a charge of the same would likely prevail for the state.
Larceny? Please see definition supra. Here, the facts show that Corky did intend to trespassorily take the laptop from V's home; however, upon Brenda's arrival he was startled and knocked unconscious. Once able to regain his consciousness he fled the scene without any property. Therefore a charge of larceny would not be valid against Corky as he had the requisite intent but did not actually take away any property from V.
27

Question 3
Betsy contacted Sam, a salesman who works for Luxe, a company that sells luxury boats, and told him that she was interested in purchasing a luxury boat. Luxe provided Betsy with free airfare and lodging at a hotel resort near the Luxe boat showroom. After shopping at the showroom, Betsy became interested in the Wind Catcher model priced at $200,000. Sam explained to Betsy the features of the Wind Catcher and told her that it was "state of the art." Sam gave Betsy a one-page purchase order form on which the words "Wind Catcher" were written in the blank space marked "Boat Model," and "$200,000" was written in the blank space marked "Price." Just above the signature line in red italics were the words "This offer by Purchaser is irrevocable for thirty (30) days. All sales are final when approved by Luxe."
Before Betsy left the hotel the next day, Sam came by to tell her that he had just learned that Luxe was about to raise its prices, but that she could order the Wind Catcher at the current price if she quickly returned the purchase order form she had received the night before. When Betsy returned home, she checked prices on the internet for comparable boats and decided the price quoted by Luxe for the Wind Catcher was a good deal. She signed and faxed the purchase order form to Luxe.
After receiving the purchase order form from Betsy, Sam prepared the documents that Betsy would need to register the boat and went to the boat harbor where Betsy planned to keep the boat to make sure that the docking facilities were adequate for the Wind Catcher.
A few days later, Betsy learned that, despite what Sam had said, Luxe had no plans to raise its prices and that the Wind Catcher was an older model without the navigation and safety features available on newer models. She immediately faxed a letter to Luxe stating that she did not want to make the purchase. That same afternoon Betsy received in the mail from Luxe a photocopy of the purchase order form that was stamped "Accepted" and signed by Luxe.
Under what theory or theories may Luxe be successful in a breach of contract action against Betsy? Discuss.
28

UCC or COMMON LAW?
Answer A to Question 3
LUXE V, BETSY
??The UCC governs transactions for the sale of goods; a good is an item that is movable at the time of identification to a contract for sale. Most other transactions are governed by the common law.
The transaction is for the sale of boat, which is movable at the time of identification to a contract for sale, and so is a good.
Thus, this transaction is governed by the UCC.
Merchants
A merchant is one who deals in goods of the kind, or who otherwise by his occupation holds himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the goods or practices involved in the transaction.
Luxe sells luxury boats, and so deals in goods of the kind. Betsy does not deal in goods of the kind, and does [not] by her occupation hold herself out as having any particular knowledge or skill in relation to boats.
Thus, Luxe is a merchant and will be held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing under the UCC; Betsy is not a merchant.
FORMATION
An enforceable contract is formed by mutual assent, often reached by an offer and an acceptance, plus consideration, absent any applicable defenses.
??29

Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent, clear and definite in its terms, and communicated in such a way as to create in the offeree a reasonable expectation that the offeror is willing to enter into a contract.
Preliminary Negotiations
Sam showed Betsy Luxe's boats, and gave her a purchase order form for the one she was interested in. However, this form was not an offer by Luxe, since [it] required Luxe's final approval and so did not manifest present contractual intent, because Betsy could not form a contract by assenting to its terms.
Offer by Betsy
After some research, Betsy faxed Luxe the purchase order, after signing it. This was a manifestation of present contractual intent, since it gave Luxe the opportunity to form a contract by assent to the offered terms. The offer contained the following terms:
Quantity: 1
Time for Performance: not stated, but a reasonable time would be implied Identity of Parties: Luxe and Betsy
Price: $200,000
Subject Matter: "Wind Catcher" luxury boat
These terms were sufficiently definite on which to base a contract, since a court could easily discern the rights and obligations of the parties, and craft an appropriate remedy for breach.
The offer stated that the sale would be final when approved by Luxe, and so could be construed as requiring only Luxe's approval/promise, but not a communication of that promise to Betsy; however, it would probably be implied that Luxe had a duty to notify Betsy within a reasonable time of its acceptance, since Betsy had no other reasonable way of knowing of the acceptance.
?30

Irrevocable Offer?
The offer stated that it was irrevocable for 30 days; however, since this promise was not supported by separate consideration, or even purported consideration, and since Betsy was not a merchant, the offer was still freely revocable.
Revocation of Offer
Betsy will argue that she validly revoked her offer when she faxed to Luxe a letter stating that she did not want to make the purchase. However, since Luxe had likely already accepted the offer, she could no longer revoke it and her revocation was ineffective.
Detrimental Reliance on Offer (Rest. 2d sec. 87(2)
Where an offeror makes an offer which he should reasonably foresee to induce the offeree's detrimental reliance, resulting in action or forbearance to act, the offer will be held open for a reasonable length of time to avoid injustice.
Luxe may argue that even if its acceptance was not effective before the rejection, the offer should be held open since Luxe relied on the offer. Sam relied on the offer by spending the time to prepare the registration documents and by going to inspect the harbor. This type of reliance was probably reasonably foreseeable, and if so Betsy might not be allowed to revoke her offer for a reasonable time.
There was a valid offer.
Acceptance
An acceptance is an outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
Luxe, according to the terms of the offer, accepted Betsy's offer when it approved the sale, thus unequivocally assenting to the offer's terms; however, Betsy may argue that this approval was not an adequate outward manifestation; if it was adequate, Luxe's
?31

letter was probably a timely notification. If mere approval was not adequate, Luxe's letter mailing the photocopy of the purchase order, signed by Luxe, was a valid acceptance.
There is no indication that sending a letter was not a reasonable method of acceptance, so the manner of Luxe's acceptance was probably adequate.
Under the general "mailbox rule," an acceptance is effective upon dispatch. Although some authorities hold that acceptance of an irrevocable offer is effective upon receipt, Betsy's offer was not truly irrevocable. Thus, Luxe's letter of acceptance was effective upon dispatch.
There was a valid acceptance, and thus mutual assent.
Consideration
Consideration is the bargained-for exchange of legal benefit and detriment.
Luxe was to give up a boat, a detriment, and to receive $200,000, a benefit; Betsy was to give up $200,000, a detriment, and to receive a boat, a benefit. Each party's detriment was what induced the other party to contract, since each party viewed its detriment as the price of its benefit; thus, the exchange was bargained for.
There is sufficient consideration.
Defenses
Statute of Frauds--UCC 2-201
A contract for the sale of goods for the price of $500 or more is not enforceable unless evidenced by a writing sufficient to indicate a contract for sale between the parties, which is signed by the party against whom enforcement is sought and which states the quantity.
???32

This transaction was for the sale of a boat, a good, for $200,000.
Since this purchase order was signed by both parties, and gave the quantity as one boat, and was sufficient to indicate a contract for sale between Luxe and Betsy, there was a sufficient memorandum and the Statute of Frauds is satisfied.
Misrepresentation
Betsy will argue that she should be allowed to avoid the contract, since Sam (Luxe's representative) misrepresented to her that (1) an immediate purchase was her last chance to purchase at the $200,000 price, and (2) the Wind Catcher was "state of the art."
Since Luxe actually had no plans to raise its prices, the first representation was false. Also, since a reasonable person would probably understand "state of the art" to mean that the boat included modern features, the second representation was also false.
Betsy will claim that these representations, if Sam knew that they were not true, were therefore fraudulent, and that she justifiably relied on those representations in making her decision to promptly purchase the boat.
If Sam did not know his representations were false, Betsy will argue that they were still material, since Sam made them with the intent of inducing her to enter the contract, and they might be expected to induce a reasonable person to agree.
Luxe will argue that Betsy was not induced to enter into the contract because of Sam's misrepresentations. Luxe will say that Betsy did not buy the boat because the price would increase later, but because the current price was better than other prices; she only made her decision more quickly because of the misrepresentation.
Luxe will also argue that Sam's "state of the art" misrepresentation did not induce Betsy to enter into the contract, since Betsy had been told all the features that were on the
?33

Wind Catcher and bought the boat on that basis. She was only misled as to the relative modernity of those features, not as to the functions of the actual features themselves. Luxe will say that Betsy bought the boat because of its features, not because of its relative modernity.
Betsy may or may not be able to avoid the contract on grounds of fraudulent and/or material misrepresentation.
DUTIES
Unless Betsy can avoid the contract for misrepresentation, she has a duty to pay for the boat and Luxe has a duty to deliver it.
Conditions
A condition is an act or event not certain to occur, which if excused or satisfied gives rise to or extinguishes a duty to tender performance under the terms of a contract.
Constructive Condition
Under the UCC, Luxe's tender of delivery of the boat is a constructive condition to Betsy's duty to pay.
Excuse of Condition--Anticipatory Repudiation
However, if Betsy positively refuses to pay for the boat before Luxe tenders delivery, this is an anticipatory repudiation and Luxe can bring suit for breach without first tendering delivery.
BREACH
If there is an enforceable contract, Betsy will be in major breach if she commits an anticipatory repudiation by refusing to pay for the boat.
????34

REMEDIES
Damages
If Betsy commits an anticipatory breach, Luxe can make a reasonable and good faith sale of the boat to another party under UCC 2-706, and recover from Betsy the difference between the contract price and the resale price. Alternatively, Luxe can recover the difference between the contract price and the market price at the time and place for tender of delivery, under UCC 2-708.
If either of these options is inadequate to place Luxe in as good a position as the sale would have done, such as a "lost volume" sale where Luxe can sell a practically unlimited number of the boats, Luxe can recover its expected profits. Luxe can also recover any incidental damages resulting from a breach by Betsy.
??35

UCC V. COMMON LAW
Answer B to Question 3
LUXE V. BETSY
??The UCC governs contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are items which are identifiable and movable at the time of sale.
This contract is for the sale of a luxury boat, an item which is identifiable and movable at the time of sale.
Thus, this will be governed by the UCC.
Merchants
Under the UCC, a merchant is one who regularly deals with the goods in question, or who holds themselves out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the goods.
In this contract, Sam regularly sells boats, and will be a merchant under the UCC.
Betsy does not regularly buy or sell boats, and does not hold herself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to boats. Thus, Betsy will not be a merchant under the UCC.
Thus, only Sam is a merchant under the UCC, and will be held to a higher standard of good faith.
FORMATION
A valid contract consists of an offer and acceptance, collectively known as mutual assent, plus consideration, minus applicable defenses.
??36

Offer
The outward manifestation of present contractual intent, which is sufficiently definite in terms, and is manifested in such a way as to create in the offeree the reasonable expectation that the offeror is willing to enter into a contract.
Invitation to deal
Betsy made an invitation to deal when she told Sam that she was interested in buying a luxury boat. This is not an offer, because it is not sufficiently definite in terms, and Betsy did not objectively manifest an intention to be bound by Sam's acceptance.
Thus this is an invitation to deal.
Preliminary negotiations
Betsy and Sam talked about the Wind Catcher, and Sam told Betsy the features of that boat. This is not an offer, because neither party made a statement that was sufficiently definite to constitute an offer.
Offer
Betsy faxed a purchase order form to Sam, which stated the following definite terms:
1. Quantity: one boat
2. Time for performance: a reasonable time 3. Identity of parties: Sam and Betsy
4. Price: $200,000
5. Subject matter: a Wind Catcher boat
This is an offer, because it is sufficiently definite in terms, and objectively manifests Betsy's intent to be bound upon an acceptance by Sam. Under the objective theory of contracts, an offer which reasonably appears to be a valid offer will be found to be valid by the courts.
?37

Thus, there is a valid offer.
Merchant's firm offer rule
This is not a firm offer, because it is not given by a merchant.
Thus, Betsy can still revoke the offer at any time prior to Sam's acceptance of the offer, even though the offer states that it will be held open for thirty days.
Revocation
Betsy will argue that she effectively revoked her offer by faxing the letter to Sam, stating that she did not want to go through with the purchase. However, under the Mailbox rule of Adams V. Lindsell, an acceptance sent by mail is valid upon dispatch, and a revocation is only effective upon receipt.
Thus, because Sam's acceptance was sent by a reasonable means, and was dispatched prior to Sam's receipt of Betsy's revocation, the acceptance will be valid, and the revocation is ineffective.
Thus, the revocation is not valid.
Acceptance
The outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
Sam manifested an unequivocal assent to the terms of Betsy's offer when he mailed back a signed copy of the purchase order form, with the word "accepted" stamped on it.
This is an expression of unequivocal assent, because Sam offered no new terms in his acceptance, and manifested his intent to be bound by the acceptance.
Betsy will argue that the mail was not a reasonable means by which to accept, and thus, the acceptance is not valid. However, under the UCC, any reasonable means may be
?38

used for an acceptance, unless the offer explicitly limits acceptance to a particular method of acceptance.
Thus, the use of the mail was reasonable, as the offer did not limit the means of acceptance, and time is not of the essence in this agreement.
Consideration
The bargained for exchange element of a contract.
Both parties gave up something of value under the contract, either money or a boat. Further, both parties received something of value under the contract, either money or a boat.
Because both parties viewed what they gave up as the price for what they received, there was a bargained for exchange of legal value, and valid consideration.
Defenses to formation
Statute of frauds
Betsy will argue that because the contract is for the sale of a good for over $500, it must be in writing to be valid. (This requirement has been modernly raised to $5,000 although the new rule has not been adopted in most states.)
However, both the offer and acceptance were in writing, and Betsy, the party to be charged, had signed her offer.
Thus, this defense is not valid.
??39

Intentional misrepresentation
Betsy will argue that Sam misrepresented the fact that the price of the Wind Catcher was going to go up, and she only had a small amount of time in which to purchase it at the lower price.
Betsy will show that this representation was not true, and that she relied on the misrepresentation to her detriment.
Betsy will further argue that Sam's representation was made with the intent to cause her reliance, which it did.
Sam will argue that Betsy would have bought the boat anyway. However, she can show that she likely would have found out that the boat was not such a good deal had she looked for a while longer at other boats.
There was a false representation of present fact, likely made with the intent to induce reliance. However, unless Betsy can show that she relied on the misrepresentation, this will not be a valid defense.
Thus, this is not a valid defense.
Incapacity
Betsy will argue that Sam, as a salesman, is not capable of accepting her offer. However, if true, this would only make the contract voidable by Sam, not by Betsy.
Thus, this defense will fail.
Undue influence
Betsy will argue that Sam used undue influence in order to obtain her offer. However, Sam will argue that he was only doing as usual salesmen will do--trying to get a sale.
40

Because Betsy likely cannot show detrimental reliance on Sam's misrepresentation, she will not be able to show that the misrepresentation unduly influenced her.
Thus, this defense will fail.
Duress
This defense will not work, because only economic influence was used on Betsy--there was no threat of other harm.
Warranties
Sam told Betsy that the boat was "state of the art." Betsy will argue that this is an express warranty, as it is not an expression of opinion, but of fact as to the nature of the boat an its accessories.
Sam will argue that he was only "puffing", and did not mean for Betsy to rely on his statements.
Because the statement objectively appeared to be of fact, the court will likely construe this to be an express warranty.
Breach of warranty
Betsy will show that the boat is not actually state of the art, because it does not have the navigation and safety features that newer models have. This is not consistent with the express warranty that the boat is state of the art.
Thus, there has been a breach of an express warranty.
?41

Parol evidence rule
Betsy will argue that Sam's statement that the boat was state of the art is a condition precedent to her duty to pay. However, Sam will raise the parol evidence rule, arguing that evidence of a prior agreement may not be raised to change the integrated contract.
Under UCC, section 2-202, evidence of a prior agreement may not be admitted if the court finds that the writing is integrated.
Thus, this defense will be valid, and will not allow Betsy to raise the prior agreement.
CONDITIONS
An act or event not certain to occur, the non-occurrence of which gives rise to or extinguishes a legal duty to tender performance under the contract.
Express condition precedent
Betsy will argue that the boat's being "state of the art" is an express condition precedent to her duty to pay the purchase price of the boat.
The court will likely find that this is a covenant, rather than a condition, because the language of the contract does not state anything about the state of the boat.
Thus, this is not likely a condition.
Constructive condition precedent
Where it is not stated by the parties, the courts will imply a condition that the shorter performance is conditioned upon the longer performance.
Thus, Betsy's duty to pay is conditioned upon Sam's duty to tender the boat to Betsy.
?42

Excuse to condition
Sam will show that his duty to tender the boat is excused, because of Betsy's anticipatory repudiation by stating that she does not want to make the purchase.
This is a valid excuse to Sam's duty.
DISCHARGE OF DUTIES
Commercial impracticability
This defense will not work, because it is not subjectively impossible for Betsy to perform.
Impossibility
This defense will not work, as it is not objectively impossible for Betsy to perform.
Duress
This defense will not work, as there was no threat of any harm to Betsy.
BREACH
An unjustifiable failure to perform under a contract.
Because there is a breach of an express warranty, and the warranty goes to the heart of the contract, Betsy is not in breach for telling Sam that she will not go through with the deal.
However, Sam is likely in breach for his breach of warranty.
If the court found that there was no breach of warranty, they would proceed as follows, infra.
??43

Anticipatory repudiation
Betsy has anticipatorily repudiated by telling Sam that she does not want to go through with the purchase of the boat.
Because of her repudiation, Sam is entitled to sue immediately for breach, encourage Betsy to perform, or wait until Betsy's duty to perform arises, and then sue if she does not perform.
Sam does have a duty to mitigate damages; however, and this might mean that he must sue immediately, if the price of the boat is about to go up.
REMEDIES
General expectancy damages: Sam may recover the profit he expected to make on the boat, plus incidental damages.
Punitive damages will not be available, unless the court finds that Sam acted in bad faith.
Lost profits seller
Because Sam could likely have sold the boat to another buyer, he will be entitled to the profits he would have made on the sale to Betsy, plus incidental damages resulting from the breach.
?44

Question 4
Billy, a minor, was suspended from school for throwing an eraser at his teacher. The school principal told Billy's parents that, in the opinion of the school psychologist, Billy should be admitted to a facility where he could be treated for his anger problem. The principal gave the parents a copy of the psychologist's report, which stated that there was a 90% certainty that Billy would hurt someone if he did not receive proper treatment. Billy's parents admitted they had known about his anger problem for about a year, but had done nothing about it.
Billy's parents ignored the principal's advice and instead sent him to stay with his uncle Dan during the suspension from school. On the first day at his uncle's house Billy began playing an electric guitar so loudly it could be heard a block away. Paul, a neighbor, worked as a therapist out of a home he rented near Dan. Paul called Dan and complained that the loud music was interfering with the therapy session of one of Paul's patients. Dan apologized and immediately had Billy lower the sound on his guitar amplifier.
Later that day, before Dan went out, he told Billy to continue to keep the volume of the music down because of Paul's complaint. After Dan left, however, Billy once again began to play the guitar very loudly. Paul immediately went to Dan's house to complain about the music. Paul told Billy that if he did not turn down the music volume, Paul would call the police. Billy told Paul to mind his own business.
As Paul began to walk back home, Billy yelled to Paul: "If you ever complain about my music again I will make you pay!" When Paul did not respond, Billy threw a large rock at Paul. The rock missed Paul but hit Penny, who was walking by. Penny suffered severe injuries as a result of being hit in the head by the rock Billy threw.
Billy did not play his guitar loudly again.
1. Under what theory or theories, if any, might Paul bring an action against Dan? Discuss.
2. Under what theory or theories, if any, might Paul bring an action against Billy? Discuss.
3. Under what theory or theories, if any, might Penny bring an action against Billy? Discuss.
4. Under what theory or theories, if any, might Penny bring an action against Billy's parents? Discuss.
45

PAUL V DAN
PRIVATE NUISANCE
Answer A to Question 4
Substantial, unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of plaintiff's property.
SUBST ANTIAL
Must be inconvenient, annoying to a reasonable person. Extreme sensitivity would not account.
Here, facts tell us that Paul, who was Dan's neighbor, "worked as a therapist out of a home he rented near Dan." Facts also tell us that loud music was "interfering with the therapy session of one of Paul's patients." And facts also tell us Billy "began playing an electric guitar so loudly it could be heard a block away." This certainly would be inconvenient and annoying to a reasonable person who is trying to work or enjoy the use of his property.
UNREASONABLE
There will be a balancing act when court will take into account the neighborhood, area, and some factors that it would constitute unreasonable.
Here, the fact that the loud music would have been heard a block away would constitute an unreasonable and substantial interference with not only the ones who are trying to work such as Paul but also for people who are just trying to enjoy their property.
Therefore, Paul has a valid claim of Private nuisance.
46

REMEDIES
Facts tell us that after Paul called Dan he asked Billy to turn the volume down. However, it continued again. Paul goes to Dan's house to complain about the music. When it continues he uses abatement. If it continues in future Paul can bring action for injunction, can show actual damages if he suffers one.
Public nuisance
Unreasonable interference with the health and safety and property rights of the public.
Plaintiff must show that he suffered special damages not suffered by the public at large to be able to recover under this theory.
Here, there are no facts indicating that Paul suffered special damages; therefore, this claim will fail.
NEGLIGENCE
A duty to conform to a standard of conduct that is breached by the defendant and the breach is actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's damages.
Only foreseeable plaintiffs are owed duty of care.
Here, Paul was clearly a foreseeable plaintiff because he was Dan's neighbor and the loud music was interfering with his work and enjoyment of his property.
STANDARD OF CONDUCT CONTROL OF A THIRD PERSON
When one has the right, duty and the authority to control a conduct of a third person when it is known that person is in need for such control or supervision.
47

Here, based on the facts that Billy's parents "ignored the principal's advice to take him to a psychologist to manage his anger problems" and sent him to Uncle Dan indicates that they did not tell Dan about Billy's anger and aggression issues; therefore he won't be liable for breaching his duty of control of a 3rd person.
However, he had a duty to act as a reasonable prudent person. When neighbor complained and Billy turned it down Dan should have inferred that when Billy is home alone he would most probably turn the volume up again. And he should have not left him alone at home.
Breach.
When person's conduct falls below standard of care.
Here one would argue that Dan should have not left Billy alone at home, and would have been reasonable to suspect that if he was playing guitar loudly once in his presence he would continue doing it when he is alone.
ACTUAL AND PROXIMATE CAUSE
When there [are] no interfering factors between defendant's acts and plaintiff's damages then defendant is the actual cause.
It can be said but for Dan leaving Billy home alone Paul would not have [and] Penny would not have suffered damages.
However, there was an interfering factor when Paul came to Dan's house to complain about loud music and that is when Billy threw a rock at him. However, this was foreseeable that someone would come to complain [a] second time when the issue was not resolved.
Therefore, Paul may be indirect proximate cause of Penny's damages.
48

However, there are no facts indicating that Dan knew in any way that Billy needs special attention and that if court finds that leaving Billy home alone was not unreasonable then Dan won't be liable for negligence.
PAUL V BILLY.
PRIVATE NUISANCE DEFINED SUPRA
ASSAULT
Act by defendant that causes apprehension in immediately receiving a battery.
Here, when Paul went to Dan's house to complain Billy opened the door and when Paul told him to "turn the music down" he told Paul mind your own business. These words are not sufficient to cause apprehension in someone because they, as facts show, were not coupled with actions or in any way threatening to [a] reasonable person; however, afterwards Billy yelled "If you ever complain about my music again I will make you pay." This again is insufficient to cause apprehension because it is not an immediate threat but future. Facts further indicate that when Paul did not respond Billy threw a large rock at him, [and] "the rock missed Paul." There are no indications whatsoever that Paul even saw the rock coming or was put in apprehension of receiving immediate battery in any way.
Therefore, the claim for assault will fail.
BATTERY
Act by the defendant that intentionally causes harmful and offensive contact with plaintiff's person.
Act must be a volitional act. Here Billy voluntarily took the rock and threw it to Paul with the intent to hit him - which constitutes an offensive contact. However, here Paul did not suffer a harmful or offensive contact. Rock missed him and hit Penny.
49

Therefore, the claim of battery for Paul would fail.
PENNY V BILLY
TRANSFERRED INTENT
When Defendant intends to commit one tort on a same person but instead commits another tort to the same person or a different person, transferred intent doctrine will apply.
The only time that transferred intent doctrine will not apply is for intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED) and Conversion.
Here, facts tell us that Billy threw the rock intending to hit Paul (commit an intentional tort of battery on Paul) but it missed him and hit Penny "who was walking by" and Penny "suffered injuries as a result of being hit in the head by the rock that Billy threw." Doctrine of transferred intent applies here. And Penny can recover under Battery.
BATTERY
Act by the defendant that intentionally causes harmful and offensive contact with plaintiff's person.
Here, Billy committed a battery on Penny and facts tell us that [she] "suffered injuries as a result of being hit in the head by the rock that Billy threw." This was a harmful and offensive contact with Penny's person - her head was injured as a result.
REMEDIES
Penny may recover from Billy reasonable value of her medical expenses, lost earnings [and] she may also recover punitive damages if she shows that Billy's act was willful and wanton.
50

PENNY V BILLY's PARENTS
VICARIOUS LIABILITY
Parents are not liable for the intentional torts of their children unless>>>>
They have a duty and authority to control a child and know that child needs controlling.
In some states parents are liable for the torts of their children up to certain dollar amounts.
NEGLIGENCE
DEFINED SUPRA
FORESEEABLE PLAINTIFF
Patty here was a foreseeable plaintiff.
Under Cordoza, anyone who is within a zone of danger is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Here Patty was clearly in the zone of danger "walking by" Paul when rock hit her.
STANDARD OF CONDUCT CONTROL OF A THIRD PERSON
When one has the right, duty and the authority to control a conduct of a third person when it is known that person is in need for such control or supervision.
Here, based on the facts that Billy's parents knew about his aggressive, violent behavior. Facts tell us that he was suspended from school for throwing [an] eraser at
51

teachers, school principal "told Billy's parents the option of school psychologist that Billy should be admitted to a facility" and the psych. report showed that there is 90% certainly that he would hurt someone if he did not receive proper treatment. However, Billy parents ignored that fact.
Therefore, they have breached their duty to control Billy knowing he is in great need for control and treatment, that he has dangerous propensities of behavior.
BREACH
When conduct falls below a standard of care. Knowing he is in great need for control and treatment that he has dangerous propensities of behavior. Billy's parents ignored that fact. Thus breached their duty.
BREACH
ACTUAL PROXIMATE CAUSE DEFINED SUPRA
But for Billy's parents' negligence Patty would not have suffered damages as when and how she did.
Damages.
Facts show that rock injured Patty's head; thus, she suffered damages.
52

Paul v. Dan
Answer B to Question 4
?Paul may be able to bring a private nuisance action against Dan.
A private nuisance occurs where an action undertaken or continuing activity by a defendant causes a plaintiff to suffer damages which result from the use and enjoyment of land which he owns, leases, or otherwise possesses and occupies.
Here, Paul "worked as a therapist out of his home" and the loud guitar music which emanated from Dan's home "was interfering with the therapy session of one of Paul's patients."
Not only is the music probably annoying, but it is affecting Paul's work and impairing his professional capacity as a therapist.
So there is a noise for which Paul is responsible because it is coming from his house, caused by his nephew whom he is supervising, which is resulting in Paul's use and enjoyment of his land. The noise occurred once, and Paul sought to remedy the situation on his own; it happened again, and he again attempted to stop it on his own. Paul could now seek injunctive relief and other remedies if he lost business as a result of the incidents.
A nuisance action brought by Paul against Dan would likely stand.
Paul v. Billy
Paul could bring an action against Billy for nuisance (see above), if liability was not attributable to Paul, who is acting as his guardian during the incident.
?53

If Paul, after having heard Billy's threat the he would "make [Paul] pay!" was aware and apprehensive of immediate and offensive contact, he could bring a tort action for assault.
Assault is an intentional act which causes another to be reasonably apprehensive of immediate battery (harmful or offensive contact).
Billy's threat would not amount to assault.
Billy threw a stone which missed Paul. If Paul had been aware of the airborne rock as it approached him and was apprehensive, he would be able to bring an action for assault. However the facts do not state that Paul was aware of the rock or that it had even been hurled in his direction; further the facts are totally silent as to whether he was apprehensive of the thrown stone or feared that it might strike him.
Paul would have a nuisance cause of action but not other causes of action against Billy.
Penny v. Billy
Billy threw a stone which "missed Paul (his intended target) but hit Penny."
Under the new theory of transferred intent where one intends an act to cause an injury to one person and actually causes an injury to another, they are liable to the injured party whether or not they contemplated the risk of harming that person.
"Billy threw a large rock at Paul."
Such an act would be a battery if it were successfully carried through.
A battery is an intentional act which results in harmful or offensive contact on another.
?54

An act is intentional if it is undertaken with the desire or belief with substantial certainty that harmful or offensive contact would occur.
Here, Billy threw a large rock "at Paul." Clearly by sending a rock in the direction of another would demonstrate intent. Billy desired or believed with substantial certainty that Paul would experience harmful or offensive contact as a result of throwing the rock.
Because Penny suffered damages as a result of Billy's action, which was undertaken with tortious intent, she would have a cause of action under the theory of transferred intent. Here the formation of the theory would be different (plaintiff, same tort, because Billy intended to commit a battery against Paul and committed a battery against Paul and committed a battery against Penny.)
Penny would have a cause of action against Billy for battery under the theory of transferred intent.
Penny v. Billy's parents.
Penny would have a negligence cause of action against Billy's parents if she could show that through the exercise of reasonable care, they could have prevented her injuries.
Negligence requires that the defendant have a duty, that the duty is breached and the breach is the actual and proximate cause of the damages which are the basis for the claim.
Here, Billy's parents were informed that "there was a 90% certainty that Billy would hurt someone if he did not receive proper treatment." They had knowledge of the risk which Billy posed to others. Further, "Billy's parents admitted they had known about his anger problem for about a year, but had done nothing about it."
?55

Because Billy's parents had knowledge of their son's dangerous proclivities, they had a duty to exercise reasonable care to prevent others from being harmed by him.
Under Cardozo's ruling in Palsgraff, a duty is owed to all those that are in the zone of danger. Here the zone of danger would extend to encompass anyone within a reasonable proximity to Billy. Wherever Billy goes the zone of danger goes and all those that are near him when his anger is unleashed are foreseeable plaintiffs.
Under Andrews where there is a duty to one there is a duty to all. Meaning that where a duty breached to one to whom it is owed and damage somehow results to others, there is liability. So if one claimed that the parents had a duty to Billy alone, and that duty was to help him with his anger problem and breach of that duty resulted in injuries to others, then there would be liability.
According to Learned Hand's algebra, which is found in the Wagon Mound cases, where the gravity of harm multiplied by the possibility that it might occur outweighs the expense and effort of preventing that harm, then there is a duty, and where that harm is not prevented there has been negligence.
Here the parents were told that there was a 90% certainty that someone would be harmed. So while the degree of harm is unknown, the likelihood of it occurring is so extreme that there can be no question but that there was a duty owed to Billy and to the general public to mitigate the hazards which were posed by Billy's anger problem.
THERE WAS A DUTY
Was that duty breached?
Billy's parents knew about the problem and "had done nothing about it." They also ignored the advice of the principal to admit Billy to "a facility where he could be treated."
56

Billy's parents failed to mitigate a hazard of which they were aware and "ignored the principal's advice and instead sent him to stay with his uncle."
The facts to not give any evidence that the parents warned Dan of Billy's dangerous characteristics.
There was a breach of duty because they did not take action to limit the risks of which they were aware.
Was the breach the actual cause of Penny's injuries?
But for Billy parents failing to remedy or make any effort to remedy the dangerous condition of which they were aware, Penny would not have been injured.
Billy, rather than being in a "facility" was at his uncle's house. Billy was a known danger because a psychologist informed the parents that there was "a 90% certainty that Billy would hurt someone" and no action was taken. Their failure to act where they had a duty to act to prevent harm to others was breached and Penny was injured as a direct result of the harm.
WAS THEIR BREACH OF DUTY THE PROXIMATE CAUSE OF PENNY'S INJURIES?
Billy's parents had notice of the danger, and had known about it long before they received notice and did not act. From that failure to act flows a chain of events which is uninterrupted by any supervening cause to Penny's injuries.
It may be argued that Dan was negligent in leaving Billy unattended, but the facts do not state that he was ever informed of the danger that Billy posed. If Dan did know of the harm Billy posed he probably never would have agreed to take care of him during the suspension.
57

Billy's parents could have prevented the harm and did not. Any and all harm would have been foreseeable and action was not taken and damage resulted.
Billy's parent's negligence was the proximate cause of the damages which resulted.
58


?California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2010

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2010 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2010 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions.
??Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject Page Torts 1
Criminal Law 14 Contracts 23 Torts 32
???
ESSAY EXAMINATION INSTRUCTIONS
?Your answer should demonstate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the differnce between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little crdit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general applicaton.

Question 1
Adam accepted an invitation from his friend Dot to attend a baseball game. The seats Dot had purchased were very good, a few rows up from the field, and just past first base. Adam had recently immigrated to the United States and knew nothing about baseball.
During the game, a player, Brad, hit a ground ball toward third base. The third baseman fielded the ball and threw to the first baseman. Brad thought he was "safe," but the first base umpire called him "out." Brad began to argue with the umpire, and in frustration, Brad threw his batting helmet to the ground. The helmet, made of a strong, hard plastic material, bounced on the ground and flew into the stands, striking Adam on the side of the head, causing a serious injury. Adam never saw the helmet coming towards him because he was looking around the stadium at the time rather than at the play on the field. As he was unfamiliar with the game of baseball, he did not know that objects occasionally fly into the stands during a baseball game.
What arguments would Adam make in support of a claim of negligence, what defense(s) can reasonably be asserted, and who is likely to prevail in a lawsuit filed by:
1. Adam against Brad? Discuss. 2. Adam against Dot? Discuss.
1

Answer A to Question 1
Adam v. Brad
Negligence:
Negligence is the failure to conform one's conduct as a reasonable person would under the same or similar circumstances. The prima facie elements of negligence are Duty; Breach; Causation and Damages.
Duty:
In general there is no duty to act; however, when one acts affirmatively they have a duty to act as a reasonable person would under similar circumstances. Under the Cardozo majority view as posited in the Palsgraf case, a duty exists to those within the foreseeable zone of danger. Under the minority Andrews view if a duty extends to one foreseeable plaintiff it is extended to all actually and proximately injured.
Here, Brad had a duty to act as a reasonable professional baseball player. Brad breached that duty when he argued with the umpire, threw his helmet to the ground and it injured Adam. Adam was in the foreseeable zone of danger because he was seated in good seats [sic] a few rows from the field and just past first base, where the incident between Brad and the umpire took place.
Therefore, Brad owed a duty to Adam.
Standard of Care:
The standard care is a measure of the duty owed. Here Brad will be held to the standard of a professional baseball player. Brad must conform his conduct to that of a reasonable professional baseball player under the same circumstances. The facts tell us that Dot purchased the tickets, and therefore it is implied that a player is being paid for his services if attendees are paying for their seats.
????2

Brad may later argue that he was an amateur player and thus his standard was that of a reasonable baseball player. However, under either Standard of Care, Brad will be obligated to act as a reasonable person.
Breach:
Breach occurs when a person who owes a duty of care acts unreasonably, thereby causing harm to the plaintiff. Here Brad breached his duty to Adam when he threw the baseball helmet so forcefully to the ground that it shattered and a shard of the helmet flew in the stands. The measure of one's breach can be calculated through the Hand formula, which states that B < P * L. The Hand formula states that if the burden (B) to reduce the injury is less than the probability (P) of the harm times the magnitude (L) of the harm, then the party has breached.
Here, if Brad had acted as a reasonably prudent professional baseball player or, for that matter even a reasonably prudent person, he would not have argued so forcefully with the umpire and he would not have, in an unsportsmanlike manner, thrown his helmet to the ground. The burden for Brad to have acted differently was relatively minor; it was merely a question of conduct, and Brad chose to act in a manner that showed poor judgment. The probability of harm occurring was great; as witnessed here, the helmet broke into shards and small pieces of flying plastic can injure others. Furthermore, the magnitude of harm can be severe and, as seen here, the shard caused a serious injury.
Therefore Brad has breached his duty to [care] because his actions caused the harm to [Adam] and it was unreasonable for him to act this way to the public and in particular to Adam.
Causation:
Causation exists in two forms, Actual and Proximate.
Actual Cause:
In order to be liable the breach must be the cause of the harm. In order for proximate cause to exist factual cause (actual cause) must first exist. Actual cause is said to exist
???3

when but for the act the injury would not have occurred. Here, but for Brad throwing the helmet to the ground Adam would not have been injured.
Therefore, Brad's act of throwing the helmet is the actual cause of injury to Adam.
Proximate Cause is a foreseeability test.
Here, Brad, by throwing his helmet so hard against the ground, caused it to shatter and impact Adam, who was in the stands. The force of the throw must have been substantial for the helmet to break and fly that far. It is also foreseeable that even if the helmet had not broken into pieces the helmet itself could have been propelled in the stands and struck a patron. Thus the act of throwing the helmet and having it or a piece of it strike a patron was foreseeable.
Brad may argue that the umpire who called him out at first base caused him to lose control and thus this temper flared; thus this act by the umpire was an intervening and superseding event that broke the chain of causation. However, the umpire's call came before Brad's act occurred and it was not intervening or superseding.
Therefore, Brad is the proximate cause of Adam's injury.
Damages:
Damages occurred when Adam was struck by the helmet that Brad threw to the ground. Adam was seriously injured by the flying shard of plastic; thus injury occurred. Therefore Brad has caused injury to Adam through his breach of duty which was the cause of harm and he will be liable to Adam under a claim of negligence.
Defenses:
The defenses that exist are comparative negligence, contributory negligence and assumption of the risk. There, Brad will assert that Adam assumed the liability through implied assumption of the risk when he came to the game. Baseball is a sport and like all sports it carries a risk of harm. However, the risk of harm is extended to those who have consented to the harm and have willfully assumed the risk.
???4

Here Brad is the player; he most likely consented to the risk associated with playing baseball. However, Adam was from out of the country. He recently immigrated to the United States and he knew nothing about baseball and how baseball players behave or what the potential for injury was when he agreed to attend the game. Therefore, he did not know of the risk nor did he assume the risk either directly or impliedly, because he was not informed, and he had no reason to know the risk.
Furthermore, Adam had no way of knowing, nor should he have known, that Brad would act in an unsportsmanlike manner. Therefore, Brad is liable to Adam for his negligent conduct.
Adam v. Dot
Negligence
Duty:
Defined supra: Here Dot had a duty to act as a reasonable person to take such action so that an unreasonable risk of harm would not occur to Adam. In general there is not duty to act. However, having gratuitously undertaken to invite Adam to the baseball game he had a duty to act as a reasonable person would. Here Adam will contend that Dot breached that duty when she did not inform him of the possibility of being harmed. Thus Dot owed a duty to Adam.
Breach:
Defined supra: In order to be liable, the breach must be the cause of the harm. In order for proximate causation to exist, actual cause must first exist.
Causation:
Actual cause is said to exist when but for the act the injury would not have occurred. Here but for Brad throwing the helmet the injury would not have occurred. Thus, the actual cause of injury is Brad throwing the helmet. There are no indications that Dot had reason to know that Brad would throw the helmet, or that he contributed in any manner to the injury. A reasonable person would not expect a baseball player to throw
???5

a helmet. Furthermore a reasonable person would merely explain the game and the rules to their friend, not explain every potential possibility of an injury. Therefore actual causation does not exist and because of this Dot will not be the cause of Adam's harm.
Therefore, Dot was not the cause of Adam's injury and because the element of actual causation is missing, she will not be liable to Adam under a cause of negligence.
Defenses:
Adam may attempt to find Dot breached her duty by not informing him of the potential harm, thereby denying him the opportunity of deciding if he should assume the risk. However, this does not appear to be a viable defense, as Dot was not under a duty to be Adam's parent or guardian, nor did she have a contractual or statutory obligation, nor did she create the peril or assume the risk merely by extending the invitation.
Therefore, Adam will not be successful in his claim of negligence against Dot.
?6

Answer B to Question 1
What arguments would Adam make in support of a claim of negligence what defenses can reasonably be asserted, and who is likely to prevail in the lawsuit filed by:
1. Adam v. Brad
Here, Adam, a baseball spectator, was injured during a game when a player threw his helmet on the ground. Adam will bring a cause of action against Brad based on negligence.
Negligence:
For a prima facie case of negligence Adam must prove that Brad owed him a duty of due care, that Brad breached that duty and Adam suffered injuries which were actually and proximately caused by Brad's breach of duty.
Duty:
Brad owed Adam a duty of due care of a reasonably prudent player under the same or similar circumstances so as to avoid unreasonable risk of harm to Adam.
Standard of Care:
The standard of care would be of a reasonably prudent baseball player. Here, Brad had a duty to behave like a reasonable player. When Brad was called out he began to argue with the umpire and become frustrated. He threw his batting helmet to the ground, which bounced on the ground and flew into the stands, striking Adam on his head, causing serious injury.
Foreseeable Plaintiff: Adam will argue that he is a foreseeable plaintiff because unreasonable conduct by any baseball player in the face of a foreseeable risk may cause him harm and, here, it did cause him harm as discussed below. Brad will argue that Adam is not a foreseeable plaintiff because he was a spectator and the helmet accidently bounced on the floor [sic] and flew into [the] stands. Hence, he was a remote plaintiff. Brad will argue under Justin Cardozo majority view in Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad duty is owed to only those who are foreseeable plaintiffs in a foreseeable zone
?????7

of danger facing foreseeable risk of harm. Adam will counter that under Justice Andrew's minority view, even if Adam is not a foreseeable plaintiff, he is still owed a duty of care, because if duty is owed to anyone it is owed to all, the "whole world". Hence, Adam is a foreseeable plaintiff.
Therefore, Brad owed a duty of reasonable care to Adam so as to avoid foreseeable risk of harm to spectators like Adam.
Breach
Breach is a failure to exercise duty of due care of a reasonable baseball player under the same or similar circumstances.
Here, when Brad became frustrated at the umpire calling him out, though he thought he was safe, he argued with the umpire and threw his batting helmet to the ground, the helmet bounced off the ground and flew into the stands, striking Adam and causing him serious head injury. Adam will argue that by throwing his helmet, Brad's conduct was unreasonable because of risk of injury to other baseball players and spectators because the helmet made of a strong hard plastic may bounce off and hit someone.
Brad will counter that incidents like throwing helmets on the ground are quite common during baseball games and it is rare that helmets usually bounce off the ground and fly into stands. Furthermore, Brad will argue that if Adam had seen the helmet coming he would have dodged and moved out of its way, but Adam did not move out of the helmet's way because he was not looking at the play but looking around the stadium, and hence he was not paying attention to the game. Adam will counter that it is only because of Brad's unreasonable conduct that he got injured because the possibility of a base, bat or helmet bouncing off and flying and injuring a spectator is always a foreseeable risk if someone is unreasonably careless.
Here, Adam will prove that Brad's conduct was reasonable based on Justice Learned Hand's formula in US v. Carrol Towing Company, where burden of prevention or mitigation was less than the probability and magnitude of harm. In other words if the probability and magnitude of harm is greater than the burden of prevention, the
?8

defendant's conduct is unreasonable. Adam will argue that the probability of someone getting injured by throwing [a] helmet made of hard plastic and bouncing and flying into the stands is much greater; furthermore, the gravity of harm here, a serious head injury, is much greater than the burden of prevention or mitigation. Here, Brad should have played by the rules of the game and respected the umpire's decision even if he thought he was safe.
Another test used to determine unreasonable conduct is by balance test. If Brad's risk of his conduct outweighs the utility of his acts then his conduct is unreasonable. Here, Adam will prove that there was no utility of Brad's unreasonable conduct of arguing, becoming frustrated and throwing his batting helmet to the ground. In contrast the risk of harm was greater because someone would get hurt.
Actual Causation:
But for Brad's unreasonable conduct, Adam would not have been injured.
Hence, Brad is the cause in fact of Adam's injury.
Proximate Causation:
Here, Adam will prove that his risk of harm or injury was foreseeable and not too remote. It is foreseeable that if someone throws a hard helmet on the ground the risk of it bouncing off into the stands and hitting someone is high. Adam will argue that there was no intervening event which broke the chain of causation. Brad may argue that by not paying attention and not looking at the playing field, Adam's conduct was an intervening event which broke the chain of causation. Adam will counter that negligent conduct of someone like him is always foreseeable.
Damages:
Here, Adam suffered a serious injury when the helmet bounced off the ground.
???9

Defenses:
?Contributory Negligence:
This measures conduct on part of the plaintiff which falls below a standard of care to which he is required to conform to for his own protection and which contributes to his injury.
Adam will argue that he did not contribute to his head injury. He had a very good seat in the first few rows and never saw the helmet coming towards him. Brad will argue that Adam was looking around the stadium rather than at the play on the field. Adam will counter that it is usual for the spectator to look around at other spectators making noise or celebrating. Hence, Adam did not contribute to his injury. Adam was unfamiliar with the baseball game, and he did not know that objects occasionally fly into the stands during the game.
Adam did not contribute to his injury; hence, there is no complete bar to his recovery.
Comparative Negligence:
This compares the negligence of the plaintiff and defendant based solely in terms of blameworthiness and apportions the damages accordingly.
Here, Adam will argue that his conduct was not comparatively negligent.
Assumption of Risk: One who knows and appreciates a known risk and voluntarily chooses to encounter it assumes the risk.
Here, Adam did not know the risk because he did not know that objects occasionally fly into stands during baseball games. Hence, he did [not] appreciate the known risk of such injury. He did not voluntarily choose to encounter this risk of the injury because an ordinary prudent spectator would not voluntarily choose to encounter such head injury.
???10

Remedies:
General Damages/Compensatory are those damages which flow naturally from the
harm and as such will make good or replace the harm or injury sustained.
Adam will plead, past, present and future pain and suffering.
Special Damages are all economic losses and expenses that arise from the harm sustained and will include past, present, and future economic losses including lost profits, lost wages, medical bills, etc.
Here, Adam will plead past, present and future economic losses including medical expenses, testing procedure, lost wages, lost profits, etc.
Punitive Damages is where the harm sustained by the plaintiff is aggravated by willful or wanton conduct of the defendant.
If the court finds Brad's conduct to be willful and wanton and intentional then Adam may be awarded punitive damages.
Nominal is declaration of plaintiff rights. Since, here, Adam has a serious head injury he will recover in general, special and maybe punitive damages.
Who will Prevail? Here, Adam will prevail in a negligent cause of action against Brad and recover general, special and even punitive damages if Brad's conduct is found to be willful and wanton conduct.
2. Adam v. Dot
Negligence
For a prima facie case of negligence Adam must prove that Dot owed him a duty of due care, that Dot breached that duty and Adam suffered injuries which were actually and proximately caused by Dot's breach of duty.
????????11

Duty
Dot owed Adam a duty of due care of a reasonably prudent person under the same or similar circumstances so as to avoid unreasonable risk of harm to Adam.
Standard of Care
The standard of care would be of a reasonably prudent person; here, Dot was a friend of Adam who invited him to a baseball game. She may have been aware that Adam had recently migrated to the United States and knew nothing about baseball.
Foreseeable Plaintiff: Adam will argue that he is a foreseeable plaintiff because unreasonable conduct or acts by this friend may cause him risk of foreseeable harm.
Therefore, Dot owed a duty to Adam as a friend inviting [him] to a baseball game.
Breach
Breach is a failure to exercise duty of due care of a reasonable baseball player under the same or similar circumstances.
Here, Adam may argue that Dot should have known that he did not know anything about baseball and that he was not warned about injuries during baseball games. Dot will counter that even if Adam did not know anything about the baseball game, it is highly unlikely that [a] helmet could bounce off the ground and fly into stands and cause Adam a serious head injury. Even if he had known about the baseball game an injury to him caused by negligence of a baseball player would still be possible. Furthermore, Dot purchased seats that were very good and past the first base.
The court finds that Dot breached a duty of due to Adam by not warning him.
Actual Causation
But for Dot's unreasonable conduct of not warning Adam about the baseball game accidents, Adam would not have been injured.
Hence, Brad is the cause in fact of Adam's injury. 12
?????
Proximate Causation
Here, Adam will argue that if someone does not know that objects occasionally fly into the stands and someone who has no knowledge about baseball, then it is, likely that he may not move out of the way of a flying helmet, bat or hard ball and get injured. Dot will counter that it was the intentional act of Brad of throwing his helmet which caused it to fly into stands that caused injury to Adam and not her unreasonable conduct. Intentional or criminal acts of someone are not foreseeable.
Therefore, Dot will not be liable to Adam in view of absence of proximate causation. Furthermore, she did not do anything unreasonable or unreasonably careless that would have caused Adam's injury.
Outcome
Therefore, Adam will not succeed in his negligent claim against Dot.
??13

Question 2
Dawn lives in an apartment with her dog Fluffy and her boyfriend Bill. A year ago Bill began buying and selling illegal drugs.
One day Bill asked Dawn to deliver a plastic bag containing a white powder to a house on Main Street. Dawn believed the bag contained cocaine and refused, saying, "I wish you would stop dealing cocaine. I want nothing to do with your dirty business."
Bill flew into a rage. He said, "I am sick and tired of your superior attitude. If you don't deliver this bag, then I am going to kill Fluffy." He then grabbed the dog and held a knife against its side until Fluffy began to squeal.
Afraid for Fluffy's well-being, Dawn agreed to deliver the bag and its contents. She put the bag in her purse, got into her car, and drove towards Main Street. She drove very carefully and within the posted speed limit to avoid getting stopped by the police. As she approached Main Street, a two-year-old boy, Victor, darted out in front of Dawn's car. Her car struck Victor before she had a chance to apply her brakes. Victor was killed immediately by the impact.
While still at the accident scene, the police arrived and arrested Dawn. In searching her purse they discovered the white powder. Chemical analysis revealed that the white powder was cocaine.
With what crimes may Dawn be charged and what defenses could she raise? Discuss.
14

Answer A to Question 2 I. Criminal Charges against Dawn
Accomplice
An accomplice is one who encourages, assists, aids, or abets in the commission of a crime. Here, Dawn delivered a plastic bag containing a white powder, later to be discovered as cocaine, to a house on Main Street. This act alone is sufficient to establish charging Dawn as an accomplice. Dawn, however, may have defenses to these actions discussed infra.
Dawn also, however, lives in an apartment with her boyfriend Bill and we are told that Bill began buying and selling illegal drugs a year ago. Dawn believed that the bag contained cocaine and attempted to refuse his request, saying, "I wish you would stop dealing cocaine. I want nothing to do with your dirty business." If Dawn had been living with someone that she knew possessed and sold cocaine, some jurisdictions may hold her liable as an accomplice for this act alone and it may not be subject to the defenses discussed infra.
Conspiracy
Conspiracy occurs when there is an agreement between two or more people to do an unlawful act or a lawful act by unlawful means and the defendant commits an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. Here, Dawn agreed with Bill to deliver the bag that she believed contained cocaine and its contents (unlawful act) for Bill. Dawn's act of putting the bag in her purse, getting in her car, and driving towards Main Street is an overt act in furtherance of their conspiracy. Dawn, however, did not have a "guilty mind" per se, as she did not want to commit the crime in question (infra). This fact and the defense of duress discussed below, however, may be a successful defense against conspiracy. Nonetheless, Dawn may be charged with conspiracy.
Pinkerton Rule
Under the Pinkerton Rule, coconspirators are guilty of the crimes that are a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the commission of the crime. Here, Dawn may be charged
????15

with any crimes that are a reasonably foreseeable consequence of her conspiracy with Bill.
Murder
Murder is the killing of another human being (homicide) with malice. Malice is established if the defendant acted with intent to kill, intent to cause grave bodily harm, with willful/wanton disregard for human life (depraved heart), or the homicide was committed during the commission of a dangerous felony (felony murder rule). Here, Victor darted out in front of Dawn's car and her car struck Victor before she had a chance to apply her brakes. Dawn's actions caused the death of Victor. Dawn, however, did not have an intent to Kill Victor, an intent to cause him grave/great bodily harm, nor did she act with wanton/willful disregard for human life. In fact, Dawn was driving very carefully and within the posted speed limit to avoid getting stopped by the police. Application of the felony murder rule, however, warrants discussion.
1st Degree Murder
1st degree murder requires an intent to kill that is premeditated (thought about the act of killing before doing so) and deliberated (cool mind capable of reflection) or if the felony murder rule applies. From the facts, the only way Dawn can possibly be guilty of 1st degree murder is under the felony murder rule. Any other form of murder would be 2nd degree murder.
Felony Murder Rule
The felony murder rule holds that if the actor kills another human being while they are engaged in the commission of an inherently dangerous felony, the homicide is held as 1st degree murder. Here, Dawn killed Victor while she was delivering cocaine for Bill. If Dawn's crime is considered an inherently dangerous felony, she may be charged with 1st degree murder under the felony murder rule. Dawn, however, will have a defense against the underlying crime of being an accomplice and/or transporting/possession of a controlled substance (infra) and these defenses may also impact her likelihood of being successfully charged with murder and mitigate her charge accordingly to either voluntary manslaughter or, more likely, involuntary manslaughter.
???16

Voluntary Manslaughter
Voluntary manslaughter is murder that is mitigated due to provocation (heat of passion), unreasonable mistake, coercion, or necessity. Here, Dawn may be able to mitigate a charge of murder to voluntary manslaughter due to acting under duress from Bill. A fortiori, however, Dawn had no intent to kill and murder will only need to be mitigated if Dawn is guilty under the felony murder rule. If there is no murder, involuntary manslaughter is the more likely charge.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is the accidental killing of another human being due to gross criminal negligence/recklessness. Here, Dawn killed Victor by hitting him with her car. This act appears to be involuntary manslaughter on its face. Dawn, however, does not appear to have been operating her vehicle with gross criminal negligence. She was driving very carefully and within the posted speed limit to avoid getting stopped by police. The court, however, may find that the reason she was driving in the first place (delivering cocaine) suffices to establish gross criminal negligence for her conduct. Dawn may be charged with involuntary manslaughter of Victor.
Possession of Controlled/Illegal Substance
Illegal possession of a controlled or illegal substance is a crime in the majority of jurisdictions. Here, Dawn was delivering cocaine for Bill and, while the police were at the accident scene of her and Victor, they found the cocaine in Dawn's purse. Chemical analysis revealed that the white powder was cocaine. Also, Dawn believed that the powder was cocaine before she began the delivery and prior to the analysis confirmation. Thus, whether the jurisdiction holds such possession as a crime requiring knowledge of the substance or it is a strict liability crime (guilty without fault), Dawn will be charged with possession of a controlled/illegal substance. Defenses, however, may apply (infra).
Attempt to Distribute Controlled/Illegal Substance
Attempt requires that the defendant have the specific intent to perform acts which, if they are carried out, will result in the target crime and the defendant takes a substantial step in furtherance of her goal. Here, Dawn technically intended to perform the act of
????17

delivering the controlled substance. Her act of placing the cocaine in her purse, getting in her car, and driving towards Main Street is a substantial step in furtherance of the goal. Dawn, however, was doing so under duress and did not have a criminal or guilty state of mind when committing these acts. Thus, her charge may be successfully defended against. Nonetheless, she may be charged with attempting to distribute a controlled/illegal substance.
Defenses:
Duress (conspiracy, attempt, possession, murder)
Duress is a defense holding that the defendant reasonably believed she was under the threat of imminent physical harm or death unless she committed the crime in question. This defense essentially holds the key to Dawn's guilt on most of the aforementioned charges. Here, Dawn agreed to deliver the cocaine and actually did so only because Bill was threatening to kill Dawn's dog, Fluffy. Dawn initially resisted Bill's solicitation of her to commit the crime, saying, "I wish you would stop dealing cocaine. I want nothing to do with your business." Bill, however, flew into a rage, saying "If you don't deliver this bag, then I am going to kill Fluffy." Bill then grabbed the dog and held a knife against its side until Fluffy began to squeal. Importantly, the threat of harm/death was to Fluffy and not Dawn. The fact dogs are considered property and not on level legal ground with humans will play a factor. Nonetheless, many people form strong bonds with their animals and would not want to see them harmed or killed and may be willing to commit the crime in question to save their dog. If this threat of imminent physical harm or death to Fluffy is enough to make a reasonable person commit the crime in question, then Dawn may have a successful defense against the charges noted supra.
?18

Answer B to Question 2
State v. Dawn
Conspiracy:
A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act or a lawful act in an unlawful manner.
Here, Dawn agreed to deliver the bag and its contents. Dawn made the agreement with Bill. Dawn believed the bag contained cocaine. Since cocaine is illegal, the delivery of which [sic] would be an illegal act.
Some jurisdictions require an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. The facts that Dawn believed the bag contained cocaine, put the bag in her purse, got into her car and drive towards Main Street, all attest to overt acts in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Absent a valid defense, Dawn could be found guilty of conspiracy.
Defense(s)
Duress: Dawn will raise the defense of Duress.
Duress is the act of committing an unlawful act under threat or fear of harm.
Dawn will assert that she initially refused Bill by stating that she wished Bill would "stop dealing cocaine" and she wanted "nothing to do with" Bill's dirty business.
However, once Bill threatened Fluffy's life, then she had no choice but to deliver the cocaine.
This defense may fail, because Bill did not threaten Dawn or another human being. Fluffy is a dog and a dog is property.
????19

However, since a dog is a living creature, evidenced by Fluffy's squeal, a person such as Dawn may feel compassion and not wish the dog to be harmed.
The facts clearly state that Dawn was afraid for Fluffy's well being. Overall, the defense for duress will most likely fail.
Feigned Agreement: A person may not be found guilty of conspiracy if they feigned the agreement.
Dawn, afraid for Fluffy's well being, did agree to deliver the cocaine.
Attempt to deliver illegal drugs.
An attempt is the specific intent to commit an act. It must go beyond the mere stages of preparation to perpetration.
Dawn placed the bag of cocaine in her purse, got into her car and drove towards Main Street. Dawn had agreed to deliver a plastic bag she thought contained cocaine. Absent striking and killing Victor, the crime would have been completed. Therefore, Dawn could be found guilty of attempt to deliver illegal drugs, absent a valid defense.
Defenses
Duress: Discussed supra.
Homicide:
The killing of a human being by another.
Here, Dawn's (D) car struck Victor (V). V was killed immediately by the impact. V was a human being.
Therefore, a homicide was committed.
?????20

Murder:
Murder is a homicide committed with malice aforethought.
Malice can be found by (1) Specific intent to kill, premeditation & deliberation, (2) Intent to cause grave bodily injury, (3) Wanton & Willful disregard for human life ("Depraved Heart"), or (4) Felony Murder.
Here (D) did not have the specific intent to kill V. Nor do the facts support intent to cause grave bodily injury.
D drove very carefully and within the posted speed limit, thus there is no indication of wanton or willful disregard to the value of human life.
Felony Murder: At common law if an innocent person died during the commission of a felony, such as burglary, arson, rape, robbery or mayhem, then the act of committing the felony would impute malice for murder.
Here D was delivering a bag of cocaine, which is not one of the big five felonies at common law.
Modernly the felony has to be inherently dangerous.
The driving of a bag of cocaine in and of itself is not inherently dangerous.
Therefore malice would not be imputed via felony murder.
Causation:
D would need to be both the actual and proximate cause of the death of V.
Actual Cause:
But for D striking V with her car, V would not have been killed. D is the actual cause of V's death.
????21

Proximate Cause:
D struck V before she had a chance to apply the brakes. V was killed immediately. D is the proximate cause of V's death.
Involuntary Manslaughter:
Is when a homicide is committed without malice while conducting yourself in a lawful manner.
D was the actual & proximate cause of V's death. D was driving carefully and within the posted speed limit. Therefore, D was conducting herself in a lawful manner.
However, D was delivering cocaine, a misdemeanor.
Misdemeanor Manslaughter Rule:
If a person is killed during the commission of a misdemeanor then the defendant may be found guilty of manslaughter.
Here, D was delivering cocaine, a misdemeanor, and V was killed during the act of the crime.
Therefore, D may be found guilty of manslaughter.
Defenses
Duress - supra.
????22

Question 3
Ann wanted to purchase a gift for her boyfriend, Ben. Ann and Ben went to Ritz Jewelry to select the gift. Charles, the store manager, assisted them. Ann explained to Charles that she wanted to purchase a gift for Ben, and that Ben could select whatever he wanted. Ben chose a large gold chain costing $2,400.
Ann and Ritz executed a written installment sales contract which identified the chain as "solid 18K gold," stated the purchase price of $2,400 which was to be paid by Ann in twenty-four equal monthly payments, and stated that the contract was not assignable.
Ben wore the gold chain proudly, but the relationship with Ann ended a few months later. When the two parted, Ann made it clear that Ben could keep the gold chain. Ben subsequently took the chain to another jeweler for cleaning and then discovered that the chain was not solid gold after all, but rather was gold plated and the thin gold plating was wearing off the chain. Ben decided to make a claim directly against Ritz for misrepresenting the chain's quality, without involving Ann.
When Ben made the claim against Ritz, Ritz informed Ben that Ritz had assigned the contract and its right to receive payments from Ann to CreditCo, a finance company. Ritz had previously notified Ann of the assignment. Ann had paid six of the twenty-four payments due under the installment sales contract. However, when Ann learned that the gold chain was not solid 18K gold as represented, she stopped making any more payments to CreditCo.
1. Can Ben prevail in a breach of contract action against Ritz? Discuss.
2. Is the assignment by Ritz to CreditCo effective? Discuss.
3. Can CreditCo prevail in a breach of contract action against Ann? Discuss.
23

Answer A to Question 3
1. Can Ben prevail in a breach of contract action against Ritz?
Here Ben and Ritz are not in priivity of contact. To determine if Ben has a right [to] enforce the written contract made by Ritz and Ann, it must first be determined if Ann and Ritz hand an enforceable contract.
UCC
Under contract law the UCC governs contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are movable things at the time of identification to the contract for sale.
Here, the Ann/Ritz contract involved a sale of a chain which is a good, because of being moved from location to location.
The UCC governs.
Merchants
A merchant is one who regularly deals in the goods.
Here, Ritz is a merchant because the deal is chains. Ann is not a merchant because she is a one time buyer.
Therefore, Ritz is a merchant and will be held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing.
Valid Contract
A valid [contract] consists of an offer, acceptance and consideration.
Offer
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent, requiring definite, and certain terms, which are committed to the offeree.
????24

Here Ann and Ritz executed a written sales contact, thus manifesting their present contractual intent to be bound to a sale of a chain.
Under the UCC, the only term received is quantity. The terms state 1 golden chain. Thus, the terms were definite.
The fact that both parties signed the contract shows the terms were communicated.
Acceptance
An unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
The parties executed a written contract, thus removing any issues of acceptance.
Consideration
That which is bargained for, and given in exchange, for a return promise, requiring benefit or detriment.
The parties exchange a chain for money.
Valid consideration exists.
A valid contact exists. Does it raise rights in Ben?
Third Party Beneficiary
A third party beneficiary contract is one wherein performance by a promissor will benefit a third party.
Ann and Ritz's contract was entered into with the intent to benefit Ben.
Generally, only those in privity of contract can sue; there is an exception for the third party beneficiaries. (Lawrence v. Fox).
???25

When Ann entered into the contract with Ritz, she told Charles the Store Manager that "she wanted to purchase a gift for Ben." Therefore, Ann displayed an intent to benefit Ben. Additionally, performance was to run directly to Ben from Ritz (promissor).
Because Ann was bestowing a benefit on Ben, he will be classified as a donee third party beneficiary; or intended third party beneficiary under the second restatement.
Under the second restatement, vesting takes place when a third party gets notice of and assents to the promise, materially changes her position in justified reliance on the promise, or brings suit to enforce the contract.
Here, not only did Ben assent to the contract, but he brought suit to enforce it: "Ben decided to make a claim directly against Ritz."
As a third party beneficiary Ben can enforce the Ann/Ritz contract, and may prevail in a breach of contract action against Ritz if Charles made a misrepresentation.
Misrepresentation
A misrepresentation of material fact which induces another to enter into a contract.
Charles stated that the chain was "solid 18K gold." The chain was only "thin plated gold." This was a misrepresentation because it was a false assertion of fact.
It was a material fact because a reasonable person would care about it in connection with the transaction.
The fact that ti was gold induced the parties to enter into the contract. Therefore, Ben may succeed against Ritz.
?26

2. Is the assignment by Ritz to CreditCo effective?
Assignment
An assignment occurs when a party to an existing contract transfers their rights under the contract.
Contract favors the free assignability of contract rights. Therefore rights are assignable unless they are too personal or prohibited by contracts. The assignment of monies is not too personal.
Ann will claim that the assignment was prohibited by contract. However, generally an anti-assignment clause only destroys the right to assign, not the power. To destroy the power, the contract language would have to say: "All assignments are null and void." This language is not present.
The assignment is effective.
3. Can CreditCo prevail in a breach of contract action against Ann?
As discussed supra, the assignment was effective. The effect of a valid assignment is that the assignee (CreditCo) steps into the shoes of the assignor (Ritz), and enjoys all rights to enforcement.
However, the obligor (Ann) may assert any defenses against the assignee that she could assert against the assignor.
As discussed supra, Charles made a misrepresentation on behalf of Ritz. Additionally, Ritz is responsible for Charles' express warranty - "solid 18K gold." The chain was not in fact solid gold. As such, Ann may raise both these defenses to formation against CreditCo.
Both the misrepresentation and breach of express warranty gives Ann the power to void the contract.
?27

Therefore CreditCo will not prevail in a breach of contract action against Ann.
28

Answer B to Question 3
1. Can Ben prevail in a breach of contact action against Ritz?
Applicable law that applies here is the UCC since it deals with goods, here being a gold chain.
Status of the Parties:
Ritz Jewelers deals in jewelry and goods the kind and as such are/is a merchant.
Ben is the bearer of a gift, gold chain. He is not a merchant.
In order to establish that a breach of contract has occurred, it is necessary to determine that a contact has been formed. Here we are told that Ann executed a written installment sales contract for a gold chain w a purchase price of $2,400. Since the facts make it clear that a written agreement was executed, mutual assent, offer, acceptance, and consideration are in order. There are no formation issues in the contract between Ann and Ritz.
Status of Ben
3rd Party Beneficiary
A 3rd party beneficiary is one who receives benefits of a contractual agreement as long as certain requirements are met.
1) They have to be named at the time of the agreement. 2) Benefit was directly to the party identified.
3) The relationship or reason for the benefit is apparent to both contractual parties. A 3rd party beneficiary rights vest once they learn of the benefit and assent to it. Here, Ben goes into the store with Ann. Ann explains to Charles that the purchase was a gift for Ben, thus identifying him at the time of the agreement. Ben selected the gold chain
???29

and wore it. The relationship between Ben and Ann was apparent, as she explained that it was a gift. Since there was no consideration given to Ann by Ben for the chain and the relationship between them is of boyfriend and girlfriend he is deemed a 3rd party donee beneficiary and his rights under the contract between Ann and Ritz vested once he assented to the chain.
Express Warranty (breach)
An express warranty is one which a merchant makes that is either a description of the goods, affirmation of fact regarding the goods, promise to repair the goods if broken, or an exhibition or model of what the good will look like. Here, Charles, a manager for Ritz, assisted in the purchase of the chain. The contract identified the chain as being solid 18K gold. Ben found out from another jeweler that it wasn't as described in the contract. Ritz has breached an express warranty and by their nature express warranties cannot be disclaimed. Based on Ben's status as of a 3PB he will prevail in a breach of contract action against Ritz.
[2.] Assignment by Ritz to CreditCo. effective?
Assignment of rights to a contract are prohibited in three situations:
1) The contract states as such that it can't be assigned.
2) The law prohibits the type of assignment.
3) The assignment changes the performance or the performance is too personal to be completed by another party.
Here the facts don't indicate that the assignment was prohibited or that personal performance would prevent the assignment. The only arguable point is the clause in the contract stating that the contract was not assignable. According to the law this type of statement doesn't prevent the right to assign the contract; it only takes away the privilege. Parties are still able to assign interest rights but are held liable for the damages that may result of the assignment. Furthermore, the facts state that Ann
?30

implied assent by continuing to pay the monthly installment after notification. She only stopped payment after the breach of express warranty. She did not stop payment after learning of the assignment.
3. Can CreditCo prevail on a breach of contract against Ann?
Assignment of rights along with delegation of duty passes along with the entire contract once the assignment is made. Here Ritz became the assignor by assigning its rights under the contract to CreditCo; CreditCo in turn became the assignee. Ann is still deemed to be the obligor under the original contract and regardless of her relationship with Ben. She purchased the chain as the primary party to answer for the cost. The chain was a gift to a 3PB, Ben. Ann still owes the remainder of her installments to CreditCo as a result of the assignment.
Breach of Warranty (express)
Defined supra.
Here, Ann can claim that as a result of the chain not complying with the express warranty she is entitled to stop payment. The failure of the express warranty can be considered a breach by CreditCo, not Ann, since as the assignee of the contract CreditCo must effectively stand in the shoes of Ritz. Here because of the breach of warranty ? is Ann, who can claim that the breach did not occur on her side of the contract; rather, it was the opposite end. If the assignment of the rights of the contract between CreditCo and Ritz was for consideration then CreditCo's better chance of recovery is against Ritz, not Ann.
?31

Question 4
Employer hired Driver to operate a delivery van. Before allowing Driver to operate the van, Employer checked Driver's prior job references, required Driver to undergo a physical examination by a medical doctor, and provided Driver with extensive training in motor vehicle safety. Medic, the medical doctor who examined Driver, discovered that Driver had a sleep disorder that caused Driver to spontaneously fall asleep and that Driver had on several occasions fallen asleep while driving. Driver pleaded with Medic not to inform Employer of the sleep disorder. Medic agreed, and omitted this information from the physical examination form that he sent to Employer. Medic also sent a letter to Employer assuring Employer that Driver was "in all respects fit for employment as a delivery van operator." Employer then provided Driver with a daily delivery route and paid him a monthly salary.
While Driver was making deliveries for Employer, the van left the road and struck Pedestrian, who suffered severe injuries as a result.
Pedestrian filed a lawsuit for the damages as a result of the injuries sustained in the accident against Driver, Employer, and Medic.
1. Can Pedestrian prevail under the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur concerning Driver's alleged negligence? Discuss.
2. What arguments will Pedestrian make in support of his claims of negligence, what defenses can reasonably be asserted, and who is likely to prevail in a lawsuit filed by Pedestrian against:
a. Employer? Discuss. b. Medic? Discuss.
32

Answer A to Question 4
Pedestrian v. Driver
Driver may be liable for negligence if it can be determined that he owed a duty of due care; that he breached that duty; and that Pedestrian suffered personal injury actually and proximately caused by Driver's negligence.
Duty
Driver owes a duty under the circumstances to conform to a standard of care of a reasonable prudent person for the protection of others against unreasonable risk of harm.
Driver owes a general duty of care to drive safely for the protection of others on the roads. Here, Driver knew that he often fell asleep on the road and by operating the delivery van he owes a duty to exercise reasonable care to others on the road.
Breach
Breach is a failure to conform to the standard of care for the protection of others against unreasonable risk of harm.
Driver failed to conform to required standard of care when his van left the road and struck Pedestrian because he knew that he was susceptible to falling asleep and took the risk that he would not cause harm to others by operating the van.
Therefore, there was a breach of duty.
Res Ipsa Loquitur
Res Ipsa Loquitur may be used to prove breach of duty if it can be shown that the breach of duty is not the type that normally would have occurred if the Driver was not negligent, the instrumentality was under the exclusive control of Driver, and that the Pedestrian did not cause his own injuries.
???33

Here, the fact that Driver left the road and struck Pedestrian is not a type of accident that happened only if the Driver was negligent. There are many other situations that could have caused the Driver to veer off the road, including mechanical failure, defective steering wheels, or emergency reaction. Thus, Drivers negligence is one of the many possible causes. This factor makes it highly unlikely that Res Ipsa Loquitur could be used in such [a] situation. Even if the Driver has exclusive control of the car that struck Pedestrian, and Pedestrian did not cause his own injuries, Res Ipsa Loquitur cannot be used if the Driver can show that accidents like this can happen due to the above mentioned factors.
Therefore, Pedestrian cannot establish breach of duty under Res Ipsa Loquitur doctrine.
Causation
The breach of duty must be the actual and proximate cause of Pedestrian's injury.
Here, there is not enough information from the facts to show that the accident was actually caused by Driver's breach of duty of care.
Assuming that Res Ipsa Loquitur can be used to establish breach, then Pedestrian's injuries were actually and proximately caused by the Driver's negligence.
Damages
Pedestrian must suffer personal injury in order to recover under negligence. Here, Pedestrian suffered severe injuries.
Therefore, there was an injury.
Conclusion
Because there was a duty, breach of duty, causation and damages, Driver will be liable for negligence.
???34

Pedestrian v. Employer
Vicarious Liability
An employer is vicariously liable for the negligence of his employees committed within the scope of the employment relationship.
Here, Driver was negligent as discussed supra. Employer hired Driver to operate the van and is thus an employer within the meaning of vicarious liability. Driver's negligence occurred within the scope of the employment relationship because Driver was making deliveries for Employer when the van left the road and struck the Pedestrian.
Therefore, Employer will be held vicariously liable for the negligence of Driver.
Negligent Hiring/Training/Supervision
Employer may be liable for negligence if it can be determined that he owed a duty of due care; that he breached that duty; and that Pedestrian suffered personal injury actually and proximately caused by Driver's negligence.
Duty
Defined supra. The Employer has a duty to make reasonable investigation of the employees it hires for the protection of others against unreasonable risk of harm.
Breach
Defined supra.
Here, Employer made reasonable efforts to investigate Driver's prior job references and physical conditions.
Causation
Defined supra.
?????35

Here, Employer did cause the Pedestrian's injury since but for the hiring of Driver, Pedestrian would not have been injured. Further, Driver's negligence was the proximate cause since it was foreseeable to Employer that if its employees were negligent while driving the delivery van, the company would be liable.
Damages
Defined and discussed supra.
Conclusion
Since Employer did not breach its duty of care, it would not be liable for negligent hiring or supervision.
Pedestrian v. Medic Negligence
Defined supra.
Special Duty
A special duty to control the act of third parties exists where there is a special relationship based on contractual relationship.
Because Medic is under a contract with Employer to make any information through the physical examination of Driver known to Employer, Medic owes a duty of care to give vital information about Driver's health to Employer.
Breach
Defined supra.
Medic breached the duty when it did not inform Employer about Driver's medical condition that would be crucial to Employer's decision to hire Driver.
Therefore, Medic breached the duty of due care.
?????36

Actual Causation
Defined supra.
But for Medic's information in the physical examination of Driver, Employer would not have hired Driver and Driver would never have caused the injuries to Pedestrian.
Therefore, there was actual causation.
Proximate Causation
Defined supra.
Medic would assert that the consequence of Driver injuring Pedestrian was not the type of risk that makes their breach of duty a foreseeable type of harm. This argument would not succeed since Medic knew that Employer's Driver was required to make deliveries as part of the jobs.
Therefore, Medic's breach of duty was the proximate cause of Pedestrian's injury.
Intervening Cause
An intervening cause that is unforeseeable breaks the chain of causation and relieves Medic of further liability.
Medic would argue that Driver's negligence in driving, knowing that he is susceptible to falling asleep, was an intervening cause that cuts off Medic's liability for harm to Pedestrian.
However, this argument would not succeed since Driver's negligence is foreseeable and Medic, Driver and Employer would be held jointly liable for Pedestrian's harm.
Damages
Defined and discussed supra.
????37

Conclusion
Since there is a duty, breach of duty, causation and damages, Medic will be liable for negligence.
?38

Answer B to Question 4
1. Res Ipsa Loquitor
"The Thing speaks for itself." Res Ipsa Loquitor is a doctrine that is used to prove negligence when there is no actual proof of the act, when the result does not occur in the absence of negligence, and when the instrumentality is in exclusive control of the defendant.
Here the facts show that the Driver, while making deliveries in his work van, left the roadway and struck Pedestrian. Pedestrian was severely injured. The van was under the exclusive control of Driver. But the event could have occurred in the absence of negligence. For example Driver could have suffered an epileptic seizure or been not paying attention. There are too many other ways that Driver might have come to hit Pedestrian for this doctrine to apply.
Res Ipsa Loquitor will not apply.
2. Pedestrian v. Employer
Vicarious Liability
When an employee is in the course and scope of his employment responsibilities then the company he works for will be held responsible for his action.
Here Driver is an employee of Employer, hired to drive a delivery van. Driver was in the course of work when he hit and injured Pedestrian. Employer will be held vicariously liable for Driver's actions.
Negligent Hiring
Negligence is the duty owed to another, a breach of that duty and that the breach of that duty is the actual and proximate cause of damages to the plaintiff.
????39

Duty
Employer had the duty of a reasonable delivery service to insure not to create risk to those around them. This included the duty to insure that their hiring procedures are adequate.
Breach
When Employer was hiring Driver they went to great lengths to ensure that he would be an adequate driver. They checked his prior job references. They required him to undergo a physical exam with [a] medical doctor. They provided him with extensive training in motor vehicle safety. The facts show that they went beyond the normal here and were very safety conscious. It would be up to Ped's lawyers to prove that employer breached, but it would be difficult.
Employer will be found not to have breached their duty of care.
Actual Cause
But for Employer hiring Driver, Ped would not have been injured.
Therefore Employer is the actual cause of Ped's injury.
Proximate Cause
Employer will argue that Driver's actions, in convincing Med to falsify his response was a supervening cause that cut off liability to Employer.
The facts indicate that while at his medical appointment that the Dr. found a sleep disorder. This disorder would cause Driver to spontaneously fall asleep. Driver even told Med that he had on several occasions fallen asleep while driving. Medic agreed to omit this info from the examination form he sent to Employer and also sent a full letter stating that Driver was "fit for employment in all respects as a driver." Had Employer known the truth they would not have put Driver to work as a driver. Due to Medic's deceit this is too remote a possibility for Employer to [be] responsible for. In fact it is criminal on Medic's part, and criminal behavior will be found to break the chain of causation.
????40

Employer will be found to not be the proximate cause of Ped's injuries.
Damages
Employer will not be held liable for any damages to Ped. Although if Ped is successful against Employer then Employer will be allowed to sue Driver and or Medic to recover their costs.
Defenses
Supra
Ped v. Medic Negligence
Supra
Duty
Here Medic had a duty to act as a reasonable medical doctor. He will be held to a standard of care of that of reasonable doctors in the same field of medicine in his local area. Modernly Drs. have started to be held to the standard of their nationwide community of Doctors.
Medic had a duty of care.
Breach
When Medic agreed to omit this critical information from the medical exam he showed a conscious disregard for the standard of care of a reasonable Dr. A reasonable Dr. would see that people who spontaneously fall asleep should not be driving delivery vans, or even driving at all. Driver even admitted to having fallen asleep before while driving. Instead of this alerting Dr. to a real problem, Dr. chose to ignore it. He was being paid by Employer just to check if these people were safe to drive.
Medic breached his duty.
??????41

Actual Cause
But for Medic falsifying the medical records, Ped would not have been injured.
Medic is the actual cause of Ped's injury.
Proximate Cause
There was no break in the chain of causation between Medic's falsifying of the medical record, and it is foreseeable that information, if omitted, would cause Driver to hit Ped.
Medic is the proximate cause of injury.
Damages
Medic will be held responsible for all of Ped's general damages that flow from the tort, medical expenses and pain and suffering.
Defenses
It would be difficult for Medic's lawyers to find any defense for Medic's behavior.
????42


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2010
California First-Year Law Students'
Examination

?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/ Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 1149 South Hill Street . Los Angeles, CA 90015-2299 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2010 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2010 California First- Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
???Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject Page 
Torts 1
Contracts 16 
Criminal Law 29 
Torts 42
???
October 26, 2010
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all 4 questions. Time allotted: 4 hours
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
Copyright  2010 - The State Bar of California All rights reserved.
?
Question 1
Pam drove to Diner, a local restaurant, at about 5:00 p.m. When she got out of her car in Diner's parking lot, she was robbed at gunpoint by an unknown assailant, who took her purse and her cellular phone. Pam later discovered that she was not the first victim of a crime in the Diner parking lot. In the past year, two other customers had been the victims of auto burglaries, which occurred while they were dining inside the restaurant. Diner put two video cameras in the parking lot, but did not hire security guards to patrol the parking lot.
As the robber began to flee, Pam wanted to get help and decided to run into Diner to use one of its telephones. She hoped that by calling "911" quickly, the robber could be apprehended and her property returned. As Pam ran across the parking lot she tripped in a large pothole and fell and broke her arm. Diner had not repaired the pothole, although customers had been complaining about it for weeks. All of the complaints were from customers who had not spotted the pothole while driving, hit it, and worried that their tires would be knocked out of alignment. The pothole was readily visible to pedestrians. Had Pam not been so panicked by the robbery, she likely would have noticed the problem and avoided it.
When Pam entered the restaurant, she asked a waiter, Wayne, to let her use Diner's phone to call "911." Wayne refused to let her use the telephone. He said Diner's policy limited use of the telephones to employees making business-related calls and strictly prohibited calls by customers. In fact, Pam later found out that Wayne had misstated the policy, which included an exception for emergencies. When Wayne refused, another customer promptly called "911" for Pam, using his own cellular phone. The paramedics and police arrived shortly thereafter, enabling Pam to get immediate treatment. However, the robber was never apprehended and Pam never recovered her purse or her cellular phone.
Pam is suing Diner. Under what theory or theories might Pam bring an action against Diner, what defenses, if any, might Diner assert, and what is the likelihood Pam will be successful in obtaining damages for:
1) The loss of her purse, her cellular phone, and her emotional distress as a result of the robbery? Discuss.
2) Her broken arm? Discuss.
3) Exacerbation of her injuries due to Wayne's refusal to allow her to use Diner's phone to call"911"? Discuss.
1

Answer A to Question 1 Pam v. Diner
Negligence - Pam's loss of purse and cell phone
Negligence is breach of duty which actually and proximately causes damage to the person or property of another.
Duty
General Duty
The diner has a general duty of due care to exercise due care in preventing harm to others.
Special Duty
An invitee is one who comes onto a landowner/occupier's premises to fulfill a business objective of the landowner/occupier. To an invitee, a landowner/occupier owes a duty to make a reasonable inspection of the premises and correct or warn of any dangerous conditions a reasonable inspection would reveal.
The facts indicate that Pam had come to the diner most likely to fulfill a business objective of the diner. As such, she would [be] an invitee with respect to Diner.
Therefore, it will be found that Diner had a duty to make a reasonable inspection of the parking lot and correct or warn of the danger of criminal activity in the parking lot.
Breach
The facts do not indicate that the diner had warned of the danger of criminal activity in the parking lot. Further, they did not take steps to correct the situation by preventing entrance by thieves by way of a secure entry or posting security guards. Therefore, they breached their special duty to correct or warn of known criminal activity.
????2

Diner will argue that they took reasonable steps to counter the risk of injury to invitees by placing the two video cameras in the parking lot. However, this will not meet the standard of their special duty to correct or warn.
This being the case, Diner will be found to have breached their duty because they neither corrected the dangerous condition nor did they warn of it.
Causation
Actual Cause - But for Diner's failure to correct or warn of the criminal activity, Pam would not have been robbed because it is likely that security would have prevented the presence of the robber or a warning would have given Pam the opportunity to avoid crime.
Proximate Cause-It is foreseeable that failing to correct or warn of the criminal activity could result in a robbery.
Diner will argue that the robbery act is an independent intervening cause cutting the chain of causation because it is a criminal act. However, this principle will not apply when the duty is to prevent criminal harm.
Having proven actual cause and proximate cause, Diner's breach of duty will be found to be the cause of Pam's damages.
Damages
Pam suffered, as a result of the breach, the loss of her purse, cellular phone, and, most likely, emotional distress.
Having proven a breach of duty which actually and proximately caused Pam's damages, Pam will have proven a prima facie case for negligence.
??3

Defenses
Assumption of the Risk
A plaintiff will be barred from recovery for negligence if it can be shown that they voluntarily encountered a known risk.
Diner will argue that it was well known that criminal activity occurred in the parking lot and the video cameras were further evidence of that and, therefore, she voluntarily encountered the risk of robbery.
However, the facts indicate that Pam did not learn until later that auto burglaries had occurred there. Therefore, this will not be a valid defense.
Negligence - Pam's broken arm.
Negligence is breach of duty which actually and proximately causes damage to the person or property of another.
Duty
General Duty
The diner has a general duty to exercise due care in preventing harm to others.
Special Duty
An invitee is one who comes onto a landowner/occupier's premises to fulfill a business objective of the landowner/occupier. To an invitee, a landowner/occupier owes a duty to make a reasonable inspection of the premises and correct or warn of any dangerous conditions a reasonable inspection would reveal.
The facts indicate that Pam had come to the diner most likely to fulfill a business objective of the diner. As such, she would [be] an invitee with respect to Diner.
Therefore, it will be found that Diner had a duty to make a reasonable inspection of the parking lot and correct or warn of the pothole in the parking lot.
????4

Breach
The facts do not indicate that the diner had warned of the danger of the pothole in the parking lot. Further, they did not take steps to correct the situation by having the pothole repaired, despite the fact that customers had complained. Therefore, they breached their special duty to correct or warn of the pothole.
This being the case, Diner will be found to have breached their duty because they neither corrected the dangerous condition nor did they warn of it.
Causation
Actual Cause - But for Diner's failure to correct or warn of the pothole, Pam would not have tripped and broken her arm, because it is likely that repairing the pothole would have avoided Pam's tripping, and warning of the pothole would have given Pam the opportunity to avoid tripping and breaking her arm.
Proximate Cause - It is foreseeable that failing to correct or warn of the pothole could result in Pam's tripping and becoming injured.
Diner will argue that the robbery act is an independent intervening cause cutting the chain of causation because it is a criminal act. However, this principle will not apply as Pam could also have tripped while walking at a normal pace and become injured.
Having proven actual cause and proximate cause, Diner's breach of duty will be found to be the cause of Pam's damages.
Damages
Pam suffered, as a result of the breach, a broken arm, related medical bills, possibly loss of wages, and pain and suffering.
Having proven a breach of duty which actually and proximately caused Pam's damage, Pam will have proven a prima facie case for negligence.
???5

Defenses
Assumption of the Risk
A plaintiff will be barred for recovery for negligence if it can be shown that they voluntarily encountered a known risk.
Diner will argue that the pothole was clearly visible, acted as its own warning, and she voluntarily encountered the risk of tripping.
However, if Pam can show that she acted in a reasonable manner, this defense will not apply. Therefore, this will not be a valid defense.
Contributory Negligence
In some jurisdictions, a plaintiff will be barred from recovery for damages for negligence if defendant can prove that the plaintiff negligently contributed to their own injury.
Diner will argue that by running in a parking lot, Pam breached a duty to exercise ordinary care when running through the parking lot and, thus, negligently contributed to her own injury.
However, if Pam can show that she acted in a reasonable manner, this defense will not be valid.
Comparative Negligence
In some jurisdictions, the amount plaintiff can recover for damages for negligence will be proportionately diminished to the degree that plaintiff negligently contributed to his own injury.
If Diner is successful in their argument discussed above under Contributory Negligence, and they are in a comparative negligence jurisdiction, they may be able to reduce the amount Pam is entitled to recover.
Negligence - Failure to Render aid.
???6

Negligence is breach of duty which actually and proximately causes damage to the person or property of another.
Duty
Vicarious Liability - Doctrine of Respondeat Superior
The master will be liable for the torts of his servants which are committed during the course and scope of their employment.
Because Wayne is an employee of Diner, Diner will be held liable for his torts if it can be shown that they were committed within the course and scope of his employment.
General Duty
The diner has a general duty of due care to exercise due care in preventing harm to others.
Special Duty
Generally, there is not duty to render aid unless there is a special relationship between the parties: by statute, contract, relationship, assumption of care or immediate peril.
The facts indicate that the restaurant had a policy that allowed for the use of the phone for emergency purposes. Pam, as a customer, may have had a special contractual relationship that caused them to owe a duty to come to the aid of Pam in letting her use the phone to call 911.
If Pam can prove this special contractual relationship and, therefore, a special duty to come to Pam's aid by allowing her to use the phone to call for help, she may proceed as follows:
Breach
Because Wayne did not allow Pam to use the phone, Pam will argue that Diner breached their duty.
This being the case, Diner will be found to have breached their duty. 7
????
Causation
Causation will be a moot point; see below under Damages.
Damages
When Wayne did not allow Pam to use the phone, a restaurant patron did and Pam was able to call for help. Therefore, she suffered no damages as a result.
If the court finds a duty and breach, there will be no cause for negligence because there were no damages.
??8

Answer B to Question 1
What claims does Pam have against Diner, what defenses can Diner assert and what is the likelihood Pam will be successful in obtaining damages for:
1. The loss of her purse, her cellular phone, and her emotional distress as a result of the robbery? Discuss.
Negligence
A plaintiff may recover personal and property damages if it can be established that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty, that the duty was breached, and that the defendant's negligence was the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries.
Special Duty-Landowner
Here, Diner is a local restaurant open to the public; thus, Diner is a landowner.
Business Invitee
Here, Pam was trying to park her car in Diner's parking lot so that she could go into the restaurant to eat. Thus, she is a business invitee, as she was going onto Diner's property for the purpose in which it was being held open. Therefore, Diner owes a duty to make a reasonable inspection of dangers and to protect against and warn against known dangers.
Breach
Diner knew that prior to Pam being robbed that two other incidents of auto theft had occurred. Diner placed two video cameras in the parking lot as a result but did not hire security guards. Under the Learned Hand formula, Diner has breached its duty if the burden of preventing harm to its patrons was outweighed by the possibility of harm occurring. Here, Diner will argue that the harm that it had a duty to protect against was that of auto theft, not robbery. However, Diner was aware that criminal activity was taking place in its parking lot and that some crimes have the potential to escalate into dangerous situations. Since the likelihood of a person being robbed and possibly
?9

murdered was high and outweighed the cost of hiring security guards it can be argued that Diner breached its duty.
Therefore, Diner breached its duty to protect its customers from known criminal activities and failed to protect Pam by failing to hire security guards.
Actual Causation
But for Diner's failure to provide security guards Pam would not have been robbed, as the security guards would have deterred individuals from committing crimes in that location.
Diner is the actual cause of Pam's injuries.
Proximate Causation
Diner's failure to provide security guards was an indirect cause of Pam having her purse and cellular phone stolen, as the robber was an intervening cause. However, the robbery was dependent on the Diner's failure to provide security guards and was a foreseeable result of a failure to provide adequate security. Therefore, Diner is the proximate cause of Pam's loss of her purse and cellular phone.
Damages-General
Pam may recover money damages for the loss of her purse and cellular phone.
Damages-Special
There are no facts indicating that Pam suffered any consequential damages as a result of the loss of her purse or cell phone; Pam will not be able to collect special damages.
Negligent Infliction of Emotional Distress
One owes a duty not to subject another to an unreasonable risk of harm that may cause unreasonable emotional distress.
?10

Non-Bystander Rule
All jurisdictions allow [damages to] a plaintiff who was directly impacted by the defendant's negligence. The majority of jurisdictions, and the general rule, require that the emotional distress results in a physical manifestation.
Here, Pam was the direct victim of Diner's negligence of failing to provide adequate security measures for its patrons. However, there are no facts that indicate Pam suffered physical manifestations of the emotional distress caused by the robbery. Therefore, Pam will not recover damages for emotional distress resulting from the robbery under a negligent theory.
Defense--Contributory Negligence
Under the common law rule, one who negligently contributes to his own injuries will be barred from recovery.
Here, there are no facts that indicate Pam was negligent. She intended to eat at Diner and parked in its parking lot as a reasonable person would have. This defense will fail.
Defense--Comparative Negligence
As discussed supra, there is no evidence that Pam contributed to her negligence. This defense will fail.
Defense--Assumption of the Risk
One who has knowledge, comprehension, and appreciation for the danger and voluntarily chooses to encounter the risk will be barred from recovery.
Pam did not know that there had been a history of criminal activity in the parking lot at Diner's prior to her robbery; therefore, she did not assume the risk. This defense will fail.
11

Outcome:
Pam will recover losses for her purse and cell phone but will not be able to recover for emotional distress resulting from the robbery.
2.) Her broken arm?
Negligence
A plaintiff may recover personal and property damages if it can be established that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty, that the duty was breached, and that the defendant's negligence was the actual and proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries.
Special Duty--Landowner
As discussed supra.
Business Invitee
Here, Pam was at Diner's to eat. Pam was parked inside of Diner's parking lot and was attempting to cross the parking lot; thus Pam was a business invitee on Diner's land. Diner owes a duty to its business invitees to make reasonable inspections and to warn [of] and make safe known dangers.
Breach
Diner knew about the pothole in its parking lot. Diner had received numerous complaints, albeit complaints from drivers who had not seen the pothole. However, it is foreseeable that one not paying attention may hurt himself and thus the pothole posed an unreasonable risk of harm to persons crossing the parking lot. Therefore, Diner breached its duty.
Actual Causation
But for Diner's failure to cover the pothole Pam would not have tripped and been injured.
Proximate Causation
?12

Diner's failure to cover the pothole was a direct and foreseeable cause of Pam's injuries. Thus, Diner was the proximate cause of Pam's injuries.
Damages--General
Pam will recover general damages for her pain and suffering related to her broken arm.
Damages--Special
Pam may recover special damages such as medical expenses and any wages she may lose due to her broken arm.
Defense-Contributory Negligence
Defined supra.
Here, Diner will assert that Pam should have seen the large pothole, and that her negligence for failing to notice the pothole contributed to her injury. The court is likely to find that she should have seen the large pothole and that she did contribute to her own injury. Thus, if the court finds Pam contributed to her own negligence she will be barred from recovery.
Defense--Comparative Negligence
Damages are weighed according to blameworthiness.
Here, if the court finds that Pam contributed to her injury she will be allowed recovery minus the percentage that she was negligent in a jurisdiction that follows the pure system. In a partial system, she will only be allowed recovery if she is 50% or less at fault. It is likely that [the] court will reduce Pam's damages based on a percentage that she was negligent.
Defense--Assumption of the Risk
Defined supra.
13

Here, the facts indicate that Pam did not see the pothole; therefore, she did not know, comprehend, or appreciate the danger. Pam did not assume the risk.
3.) Exacerbation of her injuries due to Wayne's refusal to allow her to use Diner's phone to call "911"? Discuss.
Vicarious Liability
Diner is vicariously liable for its employees' negligent conduct during the course of scope of their employment.
If it is found that Wayne negligently (see infra) misread the restaurant's phone policies and denied Pam use of the phone, [and] based on this mistake and this denial caused injury to Pam, Diner will be liable under the doctrine of Respondeat Superior.
Negligence
Defined supra.
General Duty
One owes a duty to act with due care to prevent unreasonable risks of harm and to act as a reasonable person would under the same or similar circumstances. Under Palsgraf, Cardozo argued that a duty is owed to foreseeable plaintiffs, and Andrews argued that a duty was owed to all.
Here, Wayne owed a duty not to subject persons to unreasonable risks of harm, such as an exacerbation of an existing injury by calling 911 at the request of Pam. Pam is a foreseeable plaintiff as she was injured in Diner's parking lot. Wayne was Diner's employee. As an employee he owed the patrons of Diner's a duty.
Breach
The burden of prevention, that of calling 911, was greatly outweighed by possibility of increased harm to Pam. Therefore, Wayne did not act as a reasonable person would
?14

have under the circumstances. A reasonable person would have called for assistance. Wayne breached his duty.
Actual Cause
There are no facts indicating the Pam was injured or that her injury was exacerbated by Wayne's failure to call 911. The facts indicate that a patron immediately dialed 911 for Pam and as a result she was able to get immediate medical attention. Thus, Wayne's failure to call 911 did not cause Pam's injury to get worse in a matter of minutes that it took for the patron to call 911. Therefore, Wayne is not a factual cause of any injury to Pam.
15

Question 2
Data is a data processing company. Data's business depends on the operation of several large computers. Data decided to employ an outside company to provide computer maintenance and service. Data's president and other corporate officers met with the president of Reboot to discuss a computer service agreement. The next day Reboot faxed its standard form contract to Data. The contract reads as follows:
Client hereby agrees to purchase computer maintenance services from Reboot at a cost of $2,000 per month. Reboot hereby agrees to provide up to ten hours of service per month, with additional hours payable at $300 per hour. Reboot further agrees that it will provide same-day service in response to every service request. This agreement shall expire one year from the date on which it is made. In the event that Client fails to make a payment required under this agreement, 80 per cent of the entire remaining balance under the agreement shall become immediately due and payable.
Data signed and returned the contract and made the first $2,000 payment. During the first month of the agreement, Data made two service requests. Both requests were received by Reboot at 9:00 a.m. In each case Reboot personnel arrived at Data's offices at noon and quickly fixed the problem. In both instances Data's president complained about the delay but was told it was an unusually busy day. After the second service call, Data sent a fax to Reboot stating that Data would make no further payments under the contract. (Data later hired a different service company.) Reboot then sent a letter to Data demanding $17,600, representing 80 per cent of the remaining balance. When Data refused to pay, Reboot filed a lawsuit.
The president of Data claims that during the initial meeting with Reboot's president, she told him that it was absolutely crucial that Reboot respond to service requests within one hour. She says that Reboot's president told the group, "I understand. If you sign up with us, I promise we'll be there within an hour."
Under what theory or theories might Reboot bring a lawsuit against Data, what defense(s), if any, can Data assert, and which party is likely to prevail? Discuss.
16

Common Law v. UCC
Answer A to Question 2 REBOOT V. DATA
??The UCC will apply to all transactions for the sale of goods, which are tangible, movable, and identifiable items of personal property. The common law will apply to all other contracts.
The contract between Reboot and Data was for the service of maintaining Data's equipment. It is not for the sale of goods, and therefore the common law will apply to this contract.
FORMATION
A contract will be formed when both parties reach mutual assent, consisting of a valid offer being given a valid acceptance, supported by consideration.
Offer
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent communicated in clear and definite terms to the offeree, in such a manner as to create in the offeree a reasonable expectation that the offeror intends to enter into a contract.
When Reboot faxed a standard form contract to Data, Reboot will argue that it made a valid offer. The fax manifested present contractual intent, since Data could have reasonably interpreted it as inviting acceptance, and that such acceptance would form a contract.
Further, Reboot's fax contained the following definite terms:
Quantity: 10 hours per month, plus additional hours as needed. Time for Performance: Over the following year.
Identity of the Parties: Data and Reboot.
?????17

Price: $2,000 per month, or $300/hour for additional services. Subject Matter: Maintenance of Data's computer systems.
All of the required terms being specified, the court will determine that Reboot's fax was sufficiently definite. It will therefore hold that Reboot made a valid offer to Data.
Acceptance
An outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
The facts state that Data signed the fax sent by Reboot, and sent it back. In addition, Data paid the initial $2,000. Both actions manifested unequivocal assent to Reboot's terms, and therefore the court will hold that Data validly accepted Reboot's offer.
Consideration
A bargained-for exchange of legal value, in which both parties incur a legal detriment and gain a legal benefit.
Reboot would suffer the legal detriment of providing at least 10 hours of service to Data each month, but would gain the legal benefit of $2,000 per month.
Data would suffer the legal detriment of paying $2,000 per month but would gain the legal benefit of receiving Reboot's services.
Since both parties understood what they were giving up as the price for what they received, there is a bargained-for exchange.
Thus, the court will find valid consideration to support this contract.
????18

DEFENSES TO FORMATION
Parol Evidence Rule
Statements, whether written or oral, which are made prior to or contemporaneously with the formation of a contract cannot vary or alter the terms of an integrated contract.
Data will attempt to enter evidence of Reboot's prior oral agreement that they would arrive at Data's location within one hour of each request.
Reboot will contend that the contract was fully integrated, and therefore Data's evidence should not be admitted, because it would vary or contradict the term in the offer stating that Reboot would only supply "one-day service", without specifying the lapse of time.
The court's decision will therefore turn on whether Reboot's offer constituted an integration.
Under the traditional "face of the instrument" rule, Reboot's offer would be considered an integration if it reasonably appeared to be an integration within the "four corners" of the document. Thus, since the document gives no indication that any other terms existed, Reboot would probably succeed in showing an integration under this test.
Under the Williston "Reasonable Man" approach, parol evidence will be admitted if a reasonable person would not have included the term in the contract. Here, it appears likely that a reasonable person would have placed this term in the contract, so Reboot would prevail.
However, under the majority any relevant evidence rule, any evidence may be admitted to determine whether the contract was an integration. Since the contract does not specify that it was limited, the court would accept Data's evidence, and find that the contract was not integrated as to that term.
In addition, Data could probably successfully argue that the evidence would explain the ambiguous statement in the offer, explaining what"same-day service"actually meant.
??19

Therefore, under majority rule Data's evidence will probably be admitted.
Unconscionability
Where a contract or a term within a contract is unconscionable, the court may refuse to enforce it.
Data may argue that requiring a payment of 80% of the remaining balance for the year for breach is an unconscionable term. However, since this was only one term, not the entire purpose of the contract, it will not render the entire contract unenforceable.
However, if the court considers the 80% payment term to be unconscionable, it could be stricken from the contract and not enforced.
CONDITIONS
An act or event not certain to occur, which if excused or satisfied gives rise to or extinguishes a duty to tender performance.
Condition Precedent - Payment of $2,000 per Month
Reboot's duty to perform the contractual services was conditioned on Data's payment for each month. In regards to the first month, Data did pay, and therefore Reboot's duty to perform its obligations arose.
This condition upon Reboot's performance was therefore fully satisfied.
BREACH
An unjustified failure to perform a contractual obligation.
Data will contend that Reboot is in breach of contract, because it responded three hours after each one of Data's requests for help. As discussed supra, evidence concerning the parties' prior agreement as to response time will probably be admissible.
????20

As a result, Data will show that it had specifically told Reboot that a one-hour response time was "crucial". Time was therefore of the essence in this contract. Reboot's failure to arrive at Data's center on time will therefore constitute a material breach of contract, because a time of the essence clause is always a material term.
Therefore, if the evidence is admitted, Data's refusal to perform was justified, since Reboot was in major breach. In this case, Reboot would be entitled to no remedies.
Anticipatory Repudiation
An unequivocal refusal to perform contractual obligations.
However, if the court does not accept Data's evidence, Reboot can argue that Data anticipatorily repudiated the contract. Data sent a fax to Reboot stating the they would make no further payments under the contract.
This was an unequivocal refusal to perform. Therefore, if the court does not admit evidence concerning the time-is-of-the-essence clause, Data could be found in breach of the contract. This breach would be major, since payment was a material term of Reboot and Data's agreement.
REMEDIES
Liquidated Damages
A liquidated damages clause will be enforced if exact damages are difficult to calculate, and if the nature of the clause is not penal.
If the court finds that Data breached the contract, Reboot will contend that it should recover $17,600 as 80% of the remaining contract price, as provided in the contract.
The court will probably find that this was a liquidated damages clause, since it is designed to compensate Reboot for Data's breach. In this case, it is unclear what damages Reboot would suffer as a result of the loss of the contract.
???21

However, the court will probably find that Reboot's clause was simply penal, and was not based on any estimate of Reboot's actual damages. Calling for 80% of the contract price when only 1/12th of the contracted services were provided would constitute a penalty, not compensation.
Therefore, Reboot's liquidated damage clause would probably not be enforced.
General Expectation Damages
If Data is found in breach of contract, Reboot could seek recovery for loss of expectancy. However, Reboot would be required to mitigate its damages by seeking another contract. If it does so, it could possibly recover damages for the difference in contract price between their new contract and their contract with Data.
However, as discussed supra, Data's parol evidence will probably be admissible. Therefore, Data's refusal to continue to perform would be justified, and they would not be liable for breach of contract.
Data is therefore most likely to prevail.
?22

Answer B to Question 2
Reboot v. Data What law governs?
Contracts where the subject matter is services are governed by common law.
Here, since the subject matter is "computer maintenance", a service, the common law rules apply.
Does the contract need to be in writing?
Contracts which by their terms cannot be performed within one year must be evidenced by a writing to be enforceable under the statute of frauds.
Here, the contract between R and D is set to "expire within one year from the date on which it is made" and would therefore have to be evidenced by a writing.
Here, the standard form R faxed to D would be a valid writing to evidence the intent of the parties to contract since it contains subject matter: Computer maintenance repair by R and a price ($2,000 per month) and D "signed" the agreement. Therefore there is a writing to evidence this contract which satisfies the Statute of Frauds.
Valid Contract?
In order for there to be a valid contract there must be a valid offer, acceptance, consideration and lack of formation defenses. Each is discussed below.
Preliminary Negotiations-
Here, the facts state that R met with D to discuss a computer service agreement. This would be valid preliminary negotiations since no specific terms are mentioned.
??23

Offer
An offer is the manifestation of present contractual intent by the offeror to an identified offeree with certain and definite terms.
Here, R's fax manifests R's intent to be bound by the terms of the offer. Here, R had communicated the offer by faxing it to D.
Here, there are specific terms including:
Price - $2,000 per month
Subject Matter-Computer repair maintenance by R Parties-R and P
Time of Performance-10 hours per month, same day service Time of Payment-Monthly payment by D to R.
Therefore, R has made a valid offer to D.
Acceptance
An acceptance is an unequivocal assent by the offeree to the terms of the offer; at common law the acceptance must be the mirror image of the offer to be valid acceptance.
Here, D has made a valid acceptance since she "signed and returned the contract". Under the mailbox rule, D's acceptance was effective upon dispatch.
Consideration
A legally bargained-for exchange which induces current performance, a legal detriment to the promisee, and a binding obligation on both parties.
Here, there is adequate consideration since D receives a benefit of R's services for a detriment of 2000 USD per month while R receives the benefit of 2000 USD per month
24

and suffers a detriment of performing repair work. Also, each party sought after and bargained for the other's promise.
Therefore this contract is supported by valid consideration. Defenses to formation
Here, there would be no defenses to formation; we have a valid contract. Next we will look at the terms of the contract.
Terms of the Contract
Parol Evidence Rule
The parol evidence rule prevents any prior or contemporaneous written or oral agreements from being admitted [to] the contract where it contradicts a fully integrated term found in the contract.
Here, D's admission that R "promise we'll be there in an hour" would appear to be barred since it contradicts an integrated term in the contract which states "it will provide same day service." D will only be able to display this information if the court determines that the term "same day service" is ambiguous and the contemporaneous oral statement would be permitted to help interpret the ambiguous term.
Conclusion: It is likely that the court will allow the evidence of prior oral agreement since the term "same day service" is ambiguous on its face.
Condition
A condition is an event not certain to occur which determines whether a duty arises or is extinguished. A condition can be express, implied, or constructive.
25

Condition Precedent
A condition precedent is a future event not certain to occur which creates a duty of performance for one party.
Here, the condition precedent to D's obligation to pay would be R's timely service.
Excused Condition-Anticipatory Repudiation
A party who unequivocally states to the other party that they will not tender performance owed is said to have anticipatorily repudiated the agreement which allows the nonrepudiating party to:
1. Treat the repudiation as a breach, suspend their own performance, and sue for damages.
2. Ignore the repudiation and encourage performance.
3. Wait for [when] the time of performance is due and then sue for damages.
Here, D's fax "stating that D would make no further payments under the contract" is an anticipatory repudiation which would allow for R to suspend performance without incurring liability for breach and sue for damages immediately, which R does by "filing a lawsuit" when D "refused to pay."
Duty
R owes D a duty to perform timely same day service and R owes a duty to pay 2000 USD per month for R's maintenance work.
Discharge of duty
Frustration of Purpose
Duties under a contract are discharged where there is the occurrence of an event, unforeseeable at the time of formation, which frustrates the purpose of the contract and the purpose of the contract is known to both parties.
26

Here, D will argue that it required the computers that R serviced to be in working order because D is a data processing company and that R's inability to tender service within an hour of notice frustrates the purpose of their agreement. Conversely R will counter that the terms of the contract call for same day service and that R had complied with this requirement because [in] each case R personnel arrived at D's offices at noon and quickly fixed the problem.
Therefore, unless D is successful in showing that the intent of the parties was service in one hour as discussed above, D would not be able to discharge her duties due to frustration of purpose.
Breach
A party to a contract's unexcused failure to tender or perform an absolute duty owed to the other party.
Here, D is in breach of its contractual duty to [perform] by failing to pay R its monthly payment of 2000 USD because they have a valid contract which requires such payments on the part of D, and R has tendered performance.
Conclusion -
D has breached its contract by failing to pay R, and R can now seek damages.
Liquidated Damage Clause for R?
Liquidated Damages clauses are enforceable if the damages are difficult to predict at the time of formation and are not unreasonably disproportionate and are not a penalty.
Here, it is unlikely the court will enforce the LDC because damages could be reasonably determined since R's hourly rate is $200 per hour for the first ten hours and $300 after the first ten hours. Additionally, the term "80 percent of the entire remaining balance under the agreement shall become immediately [payable]" appears to penalize D for the breach and would produce a windfall for R. This is especially so since R only rendered services for one month.
27

Therefore, it appears as though the court would not likely enforce this clause due to its penalizing D instead of an accurate measure of the harm suffered by R as a result of the breach.
Compensatory Damages
A nonbreaching party is entitled to damages that give the party the benefit of the bargain (expectation damages).
Here, R would be entitled to seek the benefit of the bargain, or, if that is found to be speculative, at minimum be reimbursed for the incidental costs incurred as the potential cost of any marketing required to attract another customer.
28

Question 3
Alan, age 18, decided that as a graduation prank he would set fire to the athletics equipment shed at the high school. Late on a Saturday night, Alan, who had consumed a few beers, told his friend, Brian, about his plan and asked Brian to drive him to the school. "That's an idiotic idea," Brian told Alan. "What if somebody's in there? Somebody might get hurt." Alan replied that he didn't think it was likely anyone would be there late at night. Brian said, "It's not my business why you want a ride. I'll give you a lift, and what you do while you're there is your problem."
Brian drove Alan to the school and parked a hundred feet from the athletics shed. The shed was made of wood. Alan had brought a single pack of paper matches, but was unable to set the shed aflame. Brian, watching from a distance, beckoned to Alan and offered him his cigarette lighter, saying, "Get this over with so we can get out of here." Alan returned to the shed with the lighter and was able to get the shed to smolder, but not catch fire. After several tries, he gave up. Alan and Brian left the school. Because of his intoxication, Alan did not hear Carl, a local homeless man, snoring inside the shed.
Unbeknownst to Alan or Brian, the shed was still smoldering. Two hours later, high winds caused the remaining sparks to burst into flame; the resulting fire destroyed the athletics shed. Carl was still asleep in the shed and was killed by the fire.
What crimes, if any, have Alan and Brian committed? What defenses can each assert, and will they be successful? Discuss.
29

Answer A to Question 3
What crimes has Alan committed?
Solicitation
Solicitation occurs when one induces another to commit a crime.
Here, Alan asked Brian to drive him to the school so that he could set fire to the athletics equipment shed at the school. At this point Alan was not asking Brian to commit a crime but merely to drive him to the location so that he himself could commit the crime. Brian would be assisting Alan to make a crime occur, though, so this would be considered a solicitation.
There was a solicitation.
Conspiracy
A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an illegal act.
Although Brian did not expressly agree to assist in committing the act his actions suggested that he impliedly agreed. This occurred when Brian gave Alan a lighter to assist in getting the shed to burn faster.
There has been a conspiracy.
Attempted Arson
An attempt is a substantial step towards perpetration of a crime.
Here, Alan had the specific intent to set fire to the athletics equipment shed at the high school. He had the apparent ability to do the act because Brian had driven him and parked [a] hundred feet away from the athletics shed. Lastly Alan was past the zone of preparation because he brought with him a single pack of paper matches. Alan was now in the zone of perpetration because he started to try to set the shed aflame. Alan
????30

continued to try and was ultimately able to get the shed to smolder but was unable to get the shed to catch fire.
Arson
In the common law, arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another.
Modernly, arson is the malicious burning of any structure.
After Alan left the school, high winds caused the remaining sparks on the shed to burst into flame, causing the shed to burst in flames. The fire was the result of Alan lighting flames to the shed. But for Alan attempting to light the shed on fire, there would not have been any sparks that could have later turned into flames. Therefore, Alan has committed the crime arson.
Homicide
Homicide is the killing of another human being.
Here, Carl, a homeless man, was killed as he was asleep in the shed. There has been a homicide.
Murder
Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought will be found when there is an intent to kill, an intent to cause serious bodily harm, reckless or wanton conduct, or through the felony murder rule.
There are no facts that suggest that Alan intended to kill Carl. In addition, there are no facts that suggest that Alan had an intent to cause serious bodily harm. There are facts to support reckless or wanton conduct because it was foreseeable that someone could have been in the shed and Alan did not do anything to ensure that the shed was empty. Finally, it is possible that the felony murder rule would apply because Alan was in the process of committing an inherently dangerous felony.
???31

Actual Cause
But for Alan lighting the shed with matches, and later a cigarette lighter, the shed would not have burned down and killed Carl.
Alan is the actual cause of Carl's murder.
Proximate Cause
Proximate cause is a natural and foreseeable consequence of one's act where there are no unforeseeable intervening factors.
It is foreseeable that when one lights a shed that a fire will be started. Alan will try to argue that his act of lighting the shed was not the proximate cause of Carl's death because when he left the shed was still in place. Carl will try to argue that the high winds were a superseding event that caused the death of Carl. However, this argument will not work because it was so foreseeable that this could happen that his friend Brian asked him prior to even going to the shed about what would happen if someone was in the shed, to which Alan answered that it was unlikely.
Alan is therefore the proximate cause of Carl's murder.
First Degree Murder
First degree murder is murder that is premeditated or deliberated. It can also be found with the felony murder rule.
There are no facts to show that Alan thought about killing Carl prior to going to the shed. There are also no facts to show that he planned it out. However, felony murder will be found when one is in the commission of an inherently dangerous felony. Alan was attempting to commit arson, which is an inherently dangerous felony; therefore outside any valid defenses Alan could be charged with first degree murder.
???32

Second Degree Murder
All murder that is not first degree murder will be considered second degree murder. As discussed above there are enough facts to show this as a first degree murder, so absent any defenses Alan will be charged with first degree murder.
Defenses
Infancy
The facts state that Alan was 18 years old. At the age of 18 one is considered an adult and will be treated in the justice system as such. This defense will fail.
Voluntary Intoxication
Here the facts state that Alan had consumed a few beers prior to attempting to set the shed on fire. Further the facts also state that because of his intoxication that [Alan] was unable to hear Carl snoring in the shed. A defense of voluntary intoxication will serve to negate any mens rea associated with the specific intent to commit a crime and will allow the mitigation of the murder to voluntary or involuntary manslaughter.
Voluntary Manslaughter
Voluntary manslaughter is an intentional killing with malice that has been mitigated. First degree murder will be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter if adequate provocation can be shown, a timeframe where a reasonable person would not have been able to cool off, and that the person did not cool off.
As discussed supra, there are no facts to indicate that this was an intentional killing.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is an unintentional killing with criminal negligence. Alan did not have the intent to kill Carl. His intention was to play a graduation prank. He was criminally negligent because he did not take reasonable care in ensuring that there wasn't anyone in the shed before lighting it. Therefore Carl will be charged with involuntary manslaughter.
??????33

Withdrawal
Alan will attempt to argue that they withdrew from the crime because they gave up. This defense will not work as their actions were responsible for the final act of arson and Carl being killed.
What crimes has Brian committed?
Accessory
An accessory is one who incites, aids, abets or encourages another to commit a crime.
Here Brian aided in the crime by agreeing to drive Alan to commit the crime of arson. Brian is an accessory.
Accomplice liability
An accomplice will be liable for all foreseeable crimes that occur as a result of their assistance.
To be discussed infra.
Conspiracy
A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an illegal act.
Although Brian did not expressly agree to assist in committing the act his actions suggested that he impliedly agreed. This occurred when he gave Alan a lighter to assist in getting the shed to burn faster.
There has been a conspiracy.
Pinkerton's rule
All members of a conspiracy will be held liable for all crimes in furtherance of their goals.
??????34

Alan will be held responsible for all crimes that Brian is held responsible for.
Attempted Arson Supra
Arson Supra
Voluntary Manslaughter Supra
Misprision of a felony
A misprision of a felony occurs when one fails to report a known felon or felony.
Here, Brian failed to report that Alan was committing arson. Brian can be charged with misprision of a felony.
Defenses
Withdrawal
Brian will attempt to argue that they withdrew from the crime because they gave up. This defense will not work as their actions were responsible for the final act of arson and Carl being killed.
??????35

Answer B to Question 3
State v Alan (A):
Conspiracy:
A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more people to perform an illegal act or to perform a legal act in an illegal manner with the specific intent that the act be carried out. Under the common law, only the agreement was necessary; however, modernly an overt act in furtherance of the agreement is necessary for there to be a conspiracy.
Here, Alan told Brian about his plan and asked him to drive him to the school so he could set it on fire. When Brian agreed to take Alan to the school, they agreed to perform an illegal act. When the two drove toward the school with matches and a lighter in tow, they were performing an overt act in furtherance of the agreement. Here, the conspiracy will be sufficient for common law and modern purposes. Alan will be charged with conspiracy.
Solicitation:
Solicitation is inciting or encouraging another to commit a crime with the specific intent that the crime be carried out. Here, Alan asked Brian to take him to the shed so that he could burn it down. By asking Brian to take him to the school so he could perform the burning, Alan was encouraging Brian to become involved in the crime he was about to commit and asking him to become an accomplice to the crime. He intended for Brian to take him to the shed and therefore intended that Brian be an accomplice. Since complicity is a criminal act, and Brian did in fact take Alan to the school, Alan will be held liable for solicitation.
Arson:
Under the common law, Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling of another. Modernly, the law has been changed to include other buildings, including the defendant's own dwelling if being done so for insurance fraud. In order for there to be an arson, the building must have gone past mere scorching and must have been
???36

severely charred and damaged. Under the common law, Alan will not be held liable for arson since the building he burned down was not a dwelling, but just the school athletic shed. However, under modern law, Alan will be held liable for arson. He had the specific intent to burn down the athletic shed, which was shown when he expressed his desire to do so to Brian. Having the intent to burn down the shed, Alan will have acted maliciously. Since the shed was burned and destroyed, the burning met the requirement of charring and thus Alan will be held liable for arson. Alan might argue that he only let the shed smolder and didn't actually burn it down; however, since he set the chain of events in motion, he will be held liable for the ultimate destruction of the shed.
Homicide:
Homicide is the killing of one person by another. The facts show that Carl, a homeless man, was inside the shed when Alan burned it down, and that he died due to the burning of the shed.
Murder:
Murder is the killing of another human being with malice aforethought. Malice can be found in four ways: 1) Specific Intent to kill, 2) Reckless disregard for [or] high risk of harm to human life (depraved heart murder), 3) Intent to cause grievous bodily injury, 4) Killing during the commission of a felony.
1) Intent to kill: Here, Alan did not know that Carl was inside the shed. Since he was unaware of Carl's presence, he did not have the specific intent to kill Carl.
2) Reckless Disregard of high risk of harm/injury to human life: Alan burned down a shed and was unaware of Carl's presence inside the shed. Although he was unaware, the burning of a building is an act that is still reckless and has a high disregard for risk to human life. The fire could have spread and even injured other people. Alan could be found to have the requisite malice due to his reckless disregard of risk to human life.
??37

3) Intent to cause grievous bodily injury: Here, Alan did not intend to cause injury to anyone. He was unaware that Carl was inside the shed and he was burning the shed down as a prank, not to harm anyone. He will not be held to have had the intent to cause grievous bodily injury.
4) Felony Murder: Felony murder occurs when a killing happens during the commission of a felony. The felony must be inherently dangerous. The felonies that are generally deemed inherently dangerous are: Burglary, Robbery, Rape, Kidnapping, and Arson. Since Carl's death occurred due to the fact that Alan lit the shed on fire, and since Alan is liable for arson, he will be held liable for felony murder.
Causation: In order to be guilty of murder, it must be proved that Alan's crimes were both the actual and proximate cause of Carl's death.
Actual: But for Alan lighting the shed on fire, Carl would not have been burned to death inside the shed.
Proximate Cause: It is foreseeable that when a building is lit on fire, that severe injury or death can occur to people around or within the building. Here, Carl was inside the shed. Although Alan was unaware of this, his burning of the shed was the proximate cause of Carl's death and Carl's death was a foreseeable result of Alan's conduct.
Degrees of Murder:
Some states have degrees of murder, and the defendant would be held liable for either 1st or 2nd degree murder.
1st degree: 1st degree murder occurs when the defendant has deliberated and premeditated the killing with the specific intent to kill. Here, Alan did not deliberate or premeditate killing Carl; he was unaware Carl would be in the shed. Since he lacks the specific intent to kill Carl, he will not be held liable for 1st degree murder.
??38

2nd degree: 2nd degree murder encompasses the reckless disregard for human life, intent to cause grievous bodily injury, and felony murder killings. Since Alan was recklessly disregarding a high risk of harm to human life and the killing occurred during the crime of an inherently dangerous felony, in a jurisdiction which applies murder in degrees, Alan would be held liable for 2nd degree murder.
Involuntary Manslaughter:
If, however, the requisite malice cannot be found, then Alan could be found liable for involuntary manslaughter. Involuntary manslaughter occurs when the defendant performs a negligent murder or he performs an unlawful act murder. Alan could be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter since he was negligent in burning down the shed without checking if there was someone inside. However, the odds are that a jury would find that Alan did have requisite malice and thus he would likely not be able to bring his charges down to involuntary manslaughter.
Alan will most likely be held guilty for felony murder or murder in the 2nd degree.
Defenses:
Voluntary Intoxication: When a defendant is voluntarily intoxicated, if he can negate the mens rea of a specific intent crime, then he may be able to escape liability for that crime. Here, Alan would probably argue he did not have the requisite intent required for murder. He would argue that he was intoxicated and did not have the intent to kill and thus he should only be held liable for manslaughter. However, since the killing occurred during the commission of a felony, this defense will likely fail and Alan will still be liable for murder. Under a jurisdiction which charges for murder in degrees, if Alan could prove that he did not have the specific intent to kill, he would be able to bring his charge down to 2nd degree murder. However, since Alan would not be charged for 1st degree murder anyway, this defense is irrelevant.
State v Brian (B):
Conspiracy: (defined supra). Here, Brian agreed to take Alan to the school so that he could burn down the athletic shed; thus he has agreed to commit a crime (being an
????39

accomplice or accessory before the fact) and has committed an overt act in furtherance of that agreement (driving them to the school). Brian will be held liable for conspiracy.
Accomplice Liability: Any person who aids, abets, or assists a principal in committing a crime with the specific intent that the crime be carried out will be held liable for accomplice liability. Here, Brian would be a Principal in the second degree. He aided Alan by driving him to the school and assisted him in committing the crime of arson by giving him a lighter to set the shed on fire when Alan's own matches would not work. A principal in the second degree is one who is constructively present at the scene of the crime but does not actually commit the crime himself. Brian might argue he did not have the specific mens rea necessary for being an accomplice; however, when he drove Alan and gave Alan the lighter to burn the shed on fire, he was aiding and assisting in the completion of the crime, and thus will be held liable for accomplice liability.
Pinkerton Rule: The Pinkerton rule makes an accomplice or coconspirator liable for any of the crimes that occur in furtherance of the agreement or crime. Here, B would be held liable for all the crimes that occurred in furtherance of Alan's conspiracy to burn down the shed and any foreseeable crimes that occur while in commission of the crime.
Arson: (defined supra) Brian will be held liable for the crime of arson, since it was in furtherance of the agreement and he contributed to the crime by giving his lighter to Alan to burn down the shed and it did in fact burn down.
Homicide (defined Supra)
Murder (defined supra)
Malice (defined supra)
Since the murder occurred due to the lighting of the shed on fire, and Brian helped light the shed on fire, Brian will be held liable for the murder of Carl during the commission of a felony-Arson.
??????40

Causation:
Actual: But for Brian giving his lighter to Alan to burn down the shed, Carl would not have died as a result.
Proximate Cause: It is foreseeable that if you give someone a lighter to burn down a building, that someone within the area or inside the building would be seriously injured or death would occur.
Degrees of Murder:
Since the murder occurred during the lighting of the shed on fire, Brian will be held liable for 2nd degree murder.
Brian will be charged with felony murder or 2nd degree murder.
Defenses:
Duress: Brian might try to raise the defense of duress claiming that he was threatened by force or harm to assist Alan with his crimes. However, the facts do not state that this occurred and so this defense will not work.
???41

Question 4
Delicious, Inc. manufactures jelly-filled doughnuts which are sold in grocery stores. Delicious doughnuts are packaged in a paper wrapper, which is recyclable, but which costs more than plastic wrappers. On the front of the wrapper is printed, "Delicious Doughnuts," and on the back is printed nutritional information.
Adrian, Cara, and Ed each purchased Delicious doughnuts at a local grocery store. The doughnut that Adrian purchased had a thumbtack inside. Not knowing this, Adrian threw the doughnut at his roommate, Bob, during a food fight at breakfast. Bob suffered a serious injury to his eye when the thumbtack scratched it.
Cara heated her doughnut in a microwave oven on a high temperature setting for several minutes. When she removed the doughnut from the microwave, it was warm to the touch. When she bit into it, however, the inside of her mouth was badly burned by the jelly filling which, because it was liquid, had been heated to a much higher temperature than the pastry on the outside.
Ed packed his doughnut in a suitcase to take on a business trip to make an important sales presentation for his company. When he opened the suitcase at his destination he found that the doughnut had leaked jelly through the paper wrapper and stained all of the clothes in the suitcase. Ed didn't have time to buy new clothes and so wore the stained clothes to the sales presentation. He didn't make the sale.
Under what theory or theories can Adrian, Bob, Cara, and Ed bring claims against Delicious, what defenses, if any, might Delicious assert, and what damages, if any, are likely to be awarded in a lawsuit brought by:
(1) Adrian against Delicious? Discuss. (2) Bob against Delicious? Discuss. (3) Cara against Delicious? Discuss. (4) Ed against Delicious? Discuss.
42

Answer A to Question 4
I. Adrian v. Delicious for Product Liability.
There are three theories available that actions can be brought for a defective
product: Negligence, Strict Product Liability, and Implied Warranty.
A. Negligence. To recover for her injuries, Adrian will have to prove that Delicious was negligent. Proving negligence requires that she establish she was owed a duty of care by Delicious, and that Delicious breached that duty, and their breach was the actual and proximate cause of her injuries. Delicious may offer passive defenses against the individual elements, or may assert direct defenses using contributory negligence, comparative fault, and/or assumption of the risk, depending on the jurisdiction. However, Adrian did not suffer any injuries from the doughnut she purchased and, therefore, cannot recover under a negligence theory.
B. Strict Product Liability. If a defective product causes injury, liability will be assessed without fault to any manufacturer, distributor, or reseller of that product. To recover, one must establish that they are a proper plaintiff, [there is] a proper defendant, a defective product, causation, and damages. Once again, Adrian has suffered no injury and therefore cannot recover under a negligence theory.
C. Implied Warranties. Under the UCC, an implied warrant of merchantability goes with the purchase of goods (including food), that states that the product is fit for its intended use. Privity used to be a requirement and, if it still were, Adrian would have an issue suing Delicious because she was in privity with the grocery store and not the manufacturer. Modernly the privity requirement has become very lax, allowing for her to sue the manufacturer directly. As she had a thumbtack in her doughnut, it was not fit for its intended use. Therefore, Adrian may be able to recover under this theory, although the recovery may be nominal.
????43

II. Bob v. Delicious for Product Liability.
There are three theories available that actions can be brought for a defective
product: Negligence, Strict Product Liability, and Implied Warranty.
A. Negligence. (defined supra).
1. Did Delicious owe a duty to Bob? When one acts affirmatively they owe a
duty to act as a reasonably prudent person under the circumstances to avoid foreseeable risks of harm to foreseeable plaintiffs. In the landmark case of Palsgraf, Judge Cardozo for the majority opinion wrote that one is a foreseeable plaintiff if they are in the "zone of danger" when they are injured. In that same case, Judge Andrews wrote the dissenting opinion where if you owed a duty to one person then you owed to everyone. Bob was injured by one of Delicious' doughnuts bought by Adrian. He may not have been in the zone of danger, but under Andrews, he would therefore qualify as a foreseeable plaintiff. Duty can be established in a number of ways. Here, as a manufacturer of doughnuts, Delicious had a duty to act as a reasonable doughnut manufacturer under the circumstances. Therefore, bob was owed a duty of care by Delicious.
2. Did Delicious breach the applicable standard of care? When one acts below the applicable standard of care and creates a foreseeable risk of harm to others, they are in breach. Here, a thumbtack was inside Adrian's doughnut [when,] unbeknownst to her, [she] threw it at Bob and caused his injury. Under Res Ipsa Loquitur an inference of negligence can be established if: 1) The type of injury is one that would not occur without someone's negligence; 2) The instrumentality was under defendant's control; 3) Plaintiff did not contribute to his own injury. Here, while Adrian did throw the doughnut at Bob and caused his injury, he might as well just have bitten into it and perhaps caused worse injury. The facts do not suggest the doughnuts were tampered with during distribution, so we can assume that they were defective when they left Delicious. Finally, the facts do not suggest that Bob did anything to contribute to his injuries. Therefore Delicious has breached a duty of reasonable care to Bob, and created an inference of breach using Res Ipsa Loquitur.
????44

3. Was the breach the Actual (legal) and Proximate cause of Bob's injury?
a. One's acts are the actual cause of plaintiff's injuries if, "but-for" their acts, plaintiff would not have been injured. This test is met because, but-for the negligence of
Delicious, Bob would not have been injured.
b. One's acts are the proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries if the manner and
type of injury is foreseeable, with no intervening superceding forces acting to break the chain of proximate causation. Here, Bob's manner and type of injury is the foreseeable result of being hit with a doughnut that has a thumbtack in it. Delicious will likely argue that Adrian throwing the doughnut is a superceding cause of Bob's injury. However, if the doughnut was not defective it wouldn't have caused the type of injury that it did here. Therefore, Delicious' negligent acts are the proximate cause of Bob's injury to his person and property.
4. Damages are required in order to recover for negligence. This threshold is met because Bob has incurred injury to his person.
5. Defenses.
a. In a contributory negligence jurisdiction (minority), any percent a plaintiff
is at fault in contributing to their injuries acts as a complete bar to their recovery. The facts do not suggest that Bob has done anything to contribute to his injuries and therefore this would not be an issue.
b. Most jurisdictions have converted to a form [of] comparative fault. With pure comparative fault, a plaintiff's recovery is reduced by whatever percentage she was at fault in causing his [sic] injuries. With modified comparative fault, the same holds true unless his percentage exceeds a threshold of either >50% or >=50% depending on the jurisdiction. As explained above, this will not be an issue either.
c. Assumption of the risk is also a complete bar to a plaintiff's recovery. One assumes a risk of danger when they are aware of and understand a risk, and voluntarily decide to expose themselves to it. There was no risk for Bob to be aware of, and this does not apply.
???45

Therefore, Bob will be able to recover for his damages under a negligence theory.
B. Strict Product Liability. Defined (supra).
1. Proper Plaintiff? Bob did not actually purchase the doughnut but is a friend
of Adrian, who did. The proper plaintiff extends beyond the actual purchaser of the product and includes family and friends or anyone who might come into contact with the product. Therefore, Bob is a proper plaintiff.
2. Proper Defendant. Delicious is the manufacturer of the doughnuts and is therefore a proper defendant.
3. Defective Product. A product is defective if it has a manufacturing or design defect, or a warning defect. Here, there appears to be a manufacturing defect because it does not appear that every single doughnut has a thumbtack in it. In case you're not convinced it is defective, there is a consumer expectations test that is used to determine if, when the product is used as it is intended, does it do so in a way that a reasonable consumer would expect? Very likely not. Therefore, we have a defective doughnut with a manufacturing defect.
4. Causation and damages are incorporated by reference from the negligence discussion above.
5. Defenses. Under strict product liability, assumption of the risk and misuse of product are the only two available.
a. Assumption of the risk is incorporated by reference from the Negligence discussion above.
b. Misuse of product. Delicious will likely argue that since the doughnut was thrown instead of eaten, that it was misused. This will be unpersuasive since if it was eaten the damages would have been potentially worse.
C. Implied Warranties. Defined and discussed (supra). Since Bob did not purchase the doughnut he would likely not be able to sue under this theory.
???????46

III. Cara v. Delicious for Product Liability.
There are three theories available that actions can be brought for a defective
product: Negligence, Strict Product Liability, and Implied Warranty.
A. Negligence. (defined supra).
1. Did Delicious owe a duty to Cara? Defined/Discussed (supra). Therefore,
Cara was owed a duty of care by Delicious.
2. Did Delicious breach the applicable standard of care? Defined/discussed
(supra). Here, there was nothing on the wrapping of the doughnut to warn Cara what could happen by microwaving it, thereby causing a foreseeable risk of harm to her. Therefore Delicious has breached a duty of reasonable care to Cara.
3. Was the breach the Actual (legal) and Proximate cause of Cara's injury?
a. One's acts are the actual cause of plaintiff's injuries if, "but-for" their acts, plaintiff would not have been injured. This test is met because, but-for the negligence of
Delicious, Cara would not have been injured.
b. One's acts are the proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries if the manner
and type of injury is foreseeable, with no intervening superseding forces acting to break the chain of proximate causation. Here, Cara's manner and type of injury is the foreseeable result of not being warned about hot filling. Therefore, Delicious' negligent acts are the proximate cause of Cara's injury.
4. Damages are required in order to recover for negligence. This threshold is met because Cara has incurred injury to her person.
5. Defenses.
a. In a contributory negligence jurisdiction (minority), any percent a plaintiff
is at fault in contributing to their injuries acts [as] a complete bar to their recovery. The facts do not suggest that Cara has done anything to contribute to [her] injuries and therefore this would not be an issue.
b. Most jurisdictions have converted to a form [of] comparative fault. With pure comparative fault, a plaintiff's recovery is reduced by whatever percentage she was at fault in causing his [sic] injuries. With modified comparative fault, the same holds true unless his percentage exceeds a threshold of either >50% or >=50% depending on the jurisdiction. As explained above, this will not be an issue either.
???????47

c. Assumption of the risk is also a complete bar to a plaintiff's recovery. One assumes a risk of danger when they are aware of and understand a risk, and voluntarily decide to expose themselves to it. There was no risk for Cara to be aware of, and this does not apply.
Therefore, Cara will be able to recover for her damages under a negligence theory.
B. Strict Product Liability. Defined (supra).
1. Proper Plaintiff? Cara purchased the doughnut and is therefore a proper
plaintiff.
2. Proper Defendant. Supra
3. Defective Product. A product is defective if it has a manufacturing or design defect, or a warning defect. Here, there appears to be a lack of warning regarding hot filling resulting from microwaving the doughnut. The burden of putting such a warning on the wrapper would be miniscule compared to the resulting injury. Therefore, we have a defective doughnut with a missing warning.
4. Causation and damages are incorporated by reference from the negligence discussion above.
5. Defenses. Under strict product liability, assumption of the risk and misuse of product are the only two available.
a. Assumption of the risk is incorporated by reference from the Negligence discussion above.
b. Misuse of product. Not applicable.
C. Implied Warranties. Defined and discussed (supra). The doughnut was actually fit for its intended use so not applicable here.
IV. Ed v. Delicious for Product Liability.
There are three theories available that actions can be brought for a defective
product: Negligence, Strict Product Liability, and Implied Warranty.
????????48

A. Negligence. (defined supra).
1. Did Delicious owe a duty to Ed? Defined/Discussed (supra). Therefore,
Ed was owed a duty of care by Delicious.
2. Did Delicious breach the applicable standard of care? Defined/discussed
(supra). Here, the paper wrapping seems to be inadequate and caused damage to Ed's property. Therefore Delicious has breached a duty of reasonable care to Ed.
3. Was the breach the Actual (legal) and Proximate cause of [Ed's] injury?
a. One's acts are the actual cause of plaintiff's injuries if, "but-for" their acts, plaintiff would not have been injured. This test is met because, but-for the negligence of
Delicious, Ed's property would not have been injured.
b. One's acts are the proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries if the manner
and type of injury is foreseeable, with no intervening superseding forces acting to break the chain of proximate causation. Here, Ed's manner and type of injury is the foreseeable result of not having adequate wrapping. Therefore, Delicious' negligent acts are the proximate cause of Ed's injury.
4. Damages are required in order to recover for negligence. This threshold is met because Ed has incurred damage to his property.
5. Defenses.
a. In a contributory negligence jurisdiction (minority), any percent a plaintiff
is at fault in contributing to their injuries acts [as] a complete bar to their recovery. The facts do not suggest that Ed has done anything to contribute to his injuries and therefore this would not be an issue.
b. Most jurisdictions have converted to a form [of] comparative fault. With pure comparative fault, a plaintiff's recovery is reduced by whatever percentage he was at fault in causing his injuries. With modified comparative fault, the same holds true unless his percentage exceeds a threshold of either >50% or >=50% depending on the jurisdiction. As explained above, this will not be an issue either.
c. Assumption of the risk is also a complete bar to a plaintiff's recovery. One assumes a risk of danger when they are aware of and understand a risk, and voluntarily decide to expose themself to it. There was no risk for Ed to be aware of, and this does not apply.
??????49

Therefore, Ed will be able to recover for his damages under a negligence theory.
B. Strict Product Liability. Defined (supra).
1. Proper Plaintiff? Ed purchased the doughnut and is therefore a proper
plaintiff.
2. Proper Defendant. Supra.
3. Defective Product. A product is defective if it has a manufacturing or design defect, or a warning defect. Here, there appears to be a design defect in the wrapping used to seal in the filling. The burden of putting such a wrapping on the doughnuts would be costly compared to the resulting injury. It is unlikely that the product is defective under these conditions.
????50

Answer B to Question 4
PRODUCT LIABILITY
A manufacturer who places a product that is defective either in manufacture, design, or warning into the stream of commerce may be liable for damages that result from the use of that product under three separate theories of product liability-intentional, negligence, and strict liability in tort.
ADRIAN v. DELICIOUS (D)
NEGLIGENCE
As a manufacturer, D owes a duty of due care to all persons who may foreseeably be injured by use of their defective product. Modernly, due care has been extended to all users (McPherson v. Buick). Here the facts indicate that Adrian purchased one of D's doughnuts from a local grocery store. Therefore, D owes a duty to Adrian.
BREACH
Adrian will argue that the doughnut that she had purchased had a thumbtack inside it and that she was unaware of its presence. Adrian will argue that D failed to inspect, identify, and correct this defect which resulted in D marketing a doughnut that did not meet the ordinary commercial expectation of the average reasonable consumer. Therefore, D breached its duty of due care to Adrian.
ACTUAL CAUSE
Adrian did not suffer any type of damage as a result of D's negligence because the facts do not indicate that Adrian bit into her doughnut.
Therefore, D is not liable to Adrian for negligence because Adrian did not suffer any damages.
?51

BOB v. DELICIOUS (D) NEGLIGENCE
Defined and discussed supra
Bob will argue that even though Bob did not purchase the doughnut (privity not required, supra), he is owed a duty of due care by D not to expose him to foreseeable and unreasonable risks of harm with the doughnut.
Therefore, it is likely that D owes a duty of due care to Bob.
BREACH - DEFECTIVE MANUFACTURE
Bob was injured when a doughnut manufactured by D was thrown at him and the thumbtack that was in it caused a serious injury to his eye. Bob will argue that D breached its duty of due care and that the doughnut was defective in its manufacture because it had a thumbtack in it. Ordinarily, a reasonable consumer would not expect to find a thumbtack in a doughnut and that D acted unreasonably by allowing a thumbtack to be placed in a doughnut.
D will argue that it took all reasonable care in its manufacturing process to insure that no foreign objects would be found in its doughnuts and that there is not evidence as to how the thumbtack got into the doughnut. Therefore, D will assert that it did not act unreasonably and therefore did not breach its duty.
RES IPSA LOQUITUR
Bob will argue that even though there is no direct evidence that the thumbtack was placed in the doughnut by D, he will argue that this type of incident would not occur in the absence of someone's negligence, and since the source of the negligence was within the scope of duty owed by D, and there are not facts to indicate that Bob contributed to his own injury, Bob will argue the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur to establish D's breach of duty.
52

Therefore, under res ipsa loquitur, D breached its duty owed to Bob.
ACTUAL CAUSE
But for the thumbtack being in the doughnut, Bob would not have suffered a severe eye injury. Therefore, D is the actual cause of Bob's injury.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
D will be deemed the proximate cause of Bob's injury if Bob's injury was a foreseeable result of D's negligence and Bob's injury was not brought about by an extraordinary unforeseeable sequence of events.
D will argue that there was an intervening act between their negligence of a thumbtack in the doughnut and Bob's injury. D will argue that it is unforeseeable that Adrian and Bob would engage in a food fight and that Adrian would throw a doughnut at Bob. D will further argue that an injury caused by a thumbtack in a doughnut would be related to a[n] injury inside someone's mouth as a result of biting into the doughnut. D will contend that it is unforeseeable that someone would suffer an eye injury from a thumbtack in a doughnut and therefore D should not be held as the proximate cause of Bob's eye injury.
If the court finds that D is the proximate cause of Bob's injury then D will be liable to Bob under a product liability theory of negligence.
DAMAGES - GENERAL
Bob may seek damages for past, present and future pain and suffering.
DAMAGES - SPECIAL
Bob may seek damages for the cost of his medical care and lost wages as a result of the injury.
DEFENSES
53

CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Contributory negligence is conduct on the part of the plaintiff which contributes to his injury and which is below the standard of care of a reasonable person to protect himself from injury and is a complete bar to recovery.
D will argue that Bob contributed to his injury because he engaged in a food fight by throwing food objects which could result in injury. If the court holds that Bob contributed to his injury he will be barred from recovery.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
Some jurisdictions, including California, determine negligence based solely on blameworthiness and will apportion damages accordingly. If Bob is determined to have contributed to his injury and that contribution is equal to or greater than D's contribution, Bob will be barred from recovery. Under a pure jurisdiction, Bob may still be able to recover regardless of his contribution.
ASSUMPTION OF RISK
D will assert that Bob had knowledge of and an appreciation for danger of being involved in a food fight and voluntarily chose to encounter that danger and should be barred from recovery. Bob will counter that a food fight is merely fun and is not dangerous because none of the foods thrown would normally cause injury.
STRICT LIABILITY IN TORT
Courts have held that manufacturers can be liable under operation of law. Thus if a manufacturer places a defective product into the stream of commerce, despite all care taken, they may be liable to all foreseeable users for damage. (Greenman v. Yuba Power Co.)
Here, Bob will argue that the doughnut had the thumbtack in it when it left D's control and that when used in its normal use would defeat the normal commercial expectation
??54

of the reasonable consumer and would be considered a dangerous product (R2nd 402a).
D will argue that a doughnut is not meant to be thrown at someone else, and even though a thumbtack was in the doughnut, the type of injury that Bob suffered was not the type that would be foreseeable. Therefore, D will contend that they should not be held strictly liable in tort to Bob for his eye injury.
CARA v. DELICIOUS (D) NEGLIGENCE
Defined and discussed supra
BREACH - WARNING
Cara heated her doughnut in a microwave oven on a high temperature and even though it was only warm to the touch on the outside, the jelly on the inside badly burned her mouth because it was liquid and had been heated to a much higher temperature than the pastry on the outside.
Cara will argue that D breached its duty by not placing an effective warning on the doughnut wrapper which would have advised her that when warming up a doughnut that one must use caution because the jelly inside can get very hot. Cara will argue that D was unreasonable in its conduct for not placing a warning because D's burden of placing the warning was much less than the probability and magnitude of an injury that could result. Cara will contend that the doughnuts are packaged in a paper wrapper with "Delicious Doughnuts" printed on the wrapper along with nutritional information. Therefore, it would have been reasonable for D to place a warning on the wrapper as well, as their failure to do so represents a breach of their duty.
ACTUAL CAUSE
But for D's failure to warn Cara, Cara would not have been injured. Therefore, D is the actual cause of Cara's injury.
55

PROXIMATE CAUSE
Defined and discussed supra
D will argue that is it's unforeseeable that someone would heat up a doughnut. However, it is likely that the court will find that D is the proximate cause of Cara's injury because many people like to heat up their pastries.
DAMAGES AND DEFENSES
Defined and discussed supra
STRICT LIABILITY IN TORT
Defined and discussed supra
Cara may argue that when the doughnut left D's control it was defective in its warning and that when used in its normal use was defective in the warning and therefore an unreasonably dangerous product when used in its normal manner.
ED v. DELICIOUS (D) NEGLIGENCE
Defined and discussed supra
BREACH - DESIGN
Ed will argue that when he packed his doughnut in his suitcase to take on a business trip that it had leaked jelly through the paper wrapper and stained all of the clothes in the suitcase. Ed will argue that if D had used a plastic wrapper then even if the jelly leaked out it would not have ruined any of his suits. Ed will argue that D improperly designed its doughnut wrapper because a paper wrapper is likely not to protect against jelly leaking out of the doughnut. Therefore, the wrapper did not meet the ordinary commercial expectation of the average reasonable consumer and that D breached its duty of properly designing the wrapper.
56

ACTUAL CAUSE
But for the wrapper not being properly designed, Ed's suits would not have been ruined.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
D will argue that it is not foreseeable that someone would pack a doughnut in a suitcase and that the wrapper is not designed for such use. Therefore, D will argue that they are not the proximate cause of damage to Ed's suits.
It is unlikely that a court would hold D liable for damage to Ed's suits.
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
D will maintain that Ed should not have placed a doughnut in his suitcase.
IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY
In every sale there is an assurance from the seller to the consumer that the product is of fair and average quality and fit for its intended purposes as compared to other products in the market.
Ed will argue that the wrapper that D used was not of fair and average quality because it allowed the jelly to leak through.
57

??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2011
California First-Year Law Students'
Examination

?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/ Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 1149 South Hill Street . Los Angeles, CA 90015-2299 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2011 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2011 California First- Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
???Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject Page Criminal Law 1
Torts 13
Contracts 25 Criminal Law 36
i
???
June 28, 2011
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all 4 questions. Time allotted: 4 hours
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
ii
?
Question 1
Mel suffers from a mental disorder that gives rise to a subconscious desire to commit homicide. Under the influence of the mental disorder, Mel formulated a plan to kill Herb by breaking into Herb's house and shooting him to death while he was asleep.
Brent, who had never met or communicated with Mel, learned of Mel's plan. Brent knew when and where Mel intended to kill Herb, and he desired to assist Mel in the crime.
On the night Mel intended to kill Herb, unbeknownst to Mel, Brent forced open the front door to Herb's house so as to effectuate Mel's entry and facilitate his killing of Herb. Mel arrived at Herb's house. He discovered the front door open and entered the house. Mel tiptoed to the bedroom and sprayed bullets into Herb's body. Unbeknownst to either Mel or Brent, Herb had died of a heart attack an hour before Mel fired the bullets.
1. Are Mel and/or Brent guilty of: a. Murder? Discuss.
b. Attempted murder? Discuss.
c. Conspiracy to commit murder? Discuss.
2. Does Mel have a defense of insanity? Discuss.
1

Question 1: Mel/Brent State vs. Mel
a. Is Mel Guilty of Murder?
Answer A to Question 1
??Murder
Homicide at common law is the unlawful killing by a person of a human being. Murder at common law is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought. The element of malice aforethought can be met through (1) the intent to kill, (2) the intent to inflict serious bodily harm, (3) depraved heart/indifference, or (4) felony murder.
Most jurisdictions break murder into two degrees, first-degree murder and second- degree murder. First-degree murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought (see supra), along with either premeditation or a death that meets the Felony Murder rule. Felony Murder exists when the death of a person occurs during the commission of an inherently dangerous felony. At common law this included Burglary, Arson, Robbery, Rape, and Kidnapping.
Here, we are told that Mel desired to commit homicide and formulated a plan to kill Herb. The State will argue that the element of premeditation is present in that Mel formulated a plan to kill Herb by breaking into his house and shooting him while Herb was asleep.
Mel will counter that the definition of homicide and murder includes the unlawful killing of a human being. At common law a human being was defined as a person whose major organs, such as the heart, were still functioning. Modern definitions usually state that a person is a human being until their brain ceases to function, even if their organs are still working. Here, we are specifically told that when Mel entered Herb's room and
?1

sprayed his body with bullets that Herb had already died of a heart attack an hour before Mel fired the bullets. Thus, while Mel had the requisite intent to kill Herb, and proceeded to take a substantial step towards killing Herb by spraying Herb's body with bullets, Herb no longer met the legal definition of a human being when Mel shot him. Thus, since Mel did not commit an unlawful killing of [a] human being, as Herb was already dead and therefore no longer met the legal definition of a human being, Mel is not liable for murder. However, he may be liable for attempted murder (see infra).
b. Is Mel Guilty of Attempted Murder?
Attempted Murder
Attempt is a specific intent crime, where the defendant must specifically intend to commit the underlying crime of murder, and has either come dangerously close to completing the crime or has taken a substantial step towards the crime of murder. Under the common law, a defendant could be liable for the attempt of the underlying criminal act if their actions came dangerously close to completing the crime. This was often referred to as the proximity test. Under the modern approach, a defendant may be liable for attempt of the underlying crime if they have taken a substantial step towards completing the criminal act. Mere preparation for attempt is insufficient.
Here, the state will argue that Mel made a substantial step towards completing the act of murder when Mel entered Herb's house, tiptoed to the bedroom and sprayed bullets into Herb's body. The state will further argue that the spraying of Mel's body with bullets meets the dangerous close proximity test for murder. Specifically they will note that Mel met the element of malice aforethought when Mel showed an outward desire to cause serious bodily harm to Mel by spraying his body with bullets. Furthermore, we are told that Mel desired to kill Herb, thus meeting the intent to kill element of malice aforethought.
Mel will argue that he should not be guilty of attempted murder due to a mistake of fact. Specifically, Mel will state that he believed that Herb was alive when he shot him. Mel
?2

will state that since Herb was already dead, and no longer a human being under the legal definition, that all Mel did was commit an act of shooting at a corpse. However, the state will counter that such a mistake of fact will not prevent Herb from being liable for attempted murder, since if the facts were as Mel believed them to be, Mel would have in fact committed murder (absent a valid defense).
Mel may claim that he knew that Herb was dead when he shot him, but this claim will likely fail because (a) Mel was going to kill Herb when he was asleep and would not easily know the difference between being asleep or dead except upon close inspection and (b) we are specifically told that Mel and Brent did not know that Herb had already died.
Thus, because Mel took a substantial step towards killing Herb when he entered Herb's home and sprayed his body with bullets, Mel has committed attempted murder. The mistake of fact that occurred in that Mel believed Herb was alive, although Herb had recently died of a heart attack, will not relieve Herb of liability for attempted murder. Attempt merges with the completed crime, but in this case, the crime of murder was legally impossible, therefore Mel will be liable for attempted murder absent a valid defense of insanity or self-defense.
c. Is Mel Guilty of Conspiracy to commit murder?
Conspiracy is when two or more persons agree to commit an unlawful act or a lawful act by unlawful means. Traditionally, conspiracy required that at least two or more of the parties had the criminal intent in what is referred to as the bilateral approach. Thus if Party A & Party B agreed to commit a crime, but Party B was a police officer only agreeing to catch Party A, then Conspiracy was not present. However, some modern jurisdictions will allow conspiracy even if only one party had the actual intent to commit the crime. Conspiracy requires either an express or implied consent of the conspiring parties, and most jurisdictions require that one of the conspirators complete a step
3

towards the completion of the agreed-to crime. However the smallest step, or even mere preparation, will suffice.
Here, we are told that Mel intended to kill Herb. Furthermore, we are told that Brent desired to assist Mel in the crime. The State will argue that the element of implied consent for conspiracy to commit murder existed by virtue of the fact that Brent assisted Mel by forcing the door of Herb's house open to facilitate Mel's killing of Herb. The state will further argue that the conspiracy was conspiracy to commit murder because Mel intended to kill Herb and Brent committed a step in furtherance of the conspiracy by helping Mel get into Herb's house (see definition of murder supra).
Mel will argue that he never met or communicated with Brent. Furthermore, although Brent helped facilitate Mel's planned killing of Herb by forcing open Herb's door, it was done unbeknownst to Mel. Mel will additionally argue that the facts do not indicate that Mel or Brent ever mutually agreed to commit a crime. There is no evidence that their actions were coordinated, discussed, or that they were even in each other's presence. Conspiracy requires a mutual meeting of the minds to commit a crime. While Brent desired to help Mel kill Herb, there is no evidence that any agreement existed between them. The mere fact that Brent wanted to help Mel does not rise to the level of conspiracy.
Mel will be found not liable for conspiracy to commit murder.
State vs. Brent
a. Is Brent Guilty of Murder?
Accomplice liability occurs when a person either aids, abets, or assists a person in the commission of a crime. Here, we are told that Brent desired to assist Mel in his plan to kill Herb. Although Brent did not communicate this desire to Mel, Brent did provide assistance for the planned murder when Brent forced open the door of Herb's house.
?4

This likely would incur liability for murder as an accomplice but for the fact that Herb was already dead. Since Herb was in fact not a human being, under the legal definition, when Mel shot him, it was legally impossible for Brent to be an accomplice to murder when Mel shot Herb (see discussion supra of Mel liability for murder). However, Brent may be liable for attempted murder (see infra).
b. Is Brent Guilty of Attempted Murder?
Accomplice liability occurs when a person either aids, abets, or assists a person in the commission of a crime. Here, we are told that Brent desired to assist Mel in his plan to kill Herb. Although Brent did not communicate this desire to Mel, Brent did provide assistance for the planned murder when Brent forced open the door of Herb's house. Brent took a substantial step towards his plan to help Mel commit murder when he forced open the door of Herb's house.
Brent will claim that he is not liable for attempted murder in that he never communicated with Mel, never discussed his desire to help Mel, and his actions to open the door were done unbeknownst to Mel. Brent will then state that he could not be an accomplice without Mel's conscious knowledge of his assistance. The state will counter that accomplice liability occurs when a person aids, assists, or abets another's criminal act. Furthermore, the state will be able to show that Brent was present the night that Mel shot Herb and helped facilitate Mel's entry and shooting of Herb. Based on these facts, Brent will be liable for attempted murder as an accomplice who assisted Mel's efforts to kill Herb.
c. Is Brent Guilty of Conspiracy to commit murder?
As discussed supra, Brent never met with Mel, or even acted in concert. While conspiracy does not require an express agreement to commit a crime, there must be a meeting of the minds to commit a criminal act as implied by circumstantial evidence, or implied consent. Here, we are told that Brent never communicated with Mel, and that
5

his actions on the night Mel shot Herb was done unbeknownst to Mel. It is not enough for Brent to simply desire to help Mel. As discussed supra, Mel and Brent did not have an implied or express agreement to commit a crime, and thus Brent is not liable for conspiracy to commit murder.
Question 2: Does Mel have a defense of insanity?
Mel's ability to successfully mount a defense of insanity revolves in part on the insanity approach used in Mel's jurisdiction, and the facts presented here. The four major insanity approaches used by most jurisdictions are (a) M'Naghten Test, (b) Irresistible Impulse, (c) MPC test, and,(d) Durham Product Test.
(a) M'Naghten Test
Under the M'Naghten Test, a defendant may be found not guilty by reason of insanity if his actions were the product of a mental disease or defect such that he did not know right from wrong or was unable to understand the nature of his actions. The M'Naghten test is used in the majority of jurisdictions.
Here, we are told that Mel's mental disorder caused him to have a subconscious desire to commit homicide. We are further told that under the influence of the mental disorder, Mel planned to kill Herb. The facts do not indicate that Mel did not understand right from wrong, or was unable to understand the nature of his act. In fact, his pre-planning seems to indicate that he knew his act was wrong. It is unlikely that Mel would be found not guilty by reason of insanity under the M'Naghten test.
(b) Irresistible Impulse
Under the irresistible impulse test, the defendant may be found not guilty by reason of insanity if their actions were the product of a mental disease or defect such that the defendant was unable to control his actions. In this approach, the defendant may know
???6

that their actions were wrong, but the mental disease or defect they had caused them to be unable to resist the criminal act. It has been stated that such a defendant would be unable to resist performing the criminal act even if there was a policeman standing at their shoulder.
Here, we are told that Mel's subconscious desire to commit homicide was due to a mental disorder, and that under the influence of the mental disorder, Mel planned to kill Herb. It is possible that the desire that Mel experienced was so overwhelming that he was under an irresistible impulse to commit the killing of Herb. Further testimony is likely needed to establish this, but it is possible that the desire was so strong that Mel would be found not guilty by reason of insanity because he was unable to resist the desire to kill due to Mel's mental disorder.
(c) MPC Approach
The MPC (Model Penal Code) approach combines the M'Naghten Test and the irresistible impulse test such that a defendant may be found not guilty by reason of insanity if they were either unable to understand right from wrong or were unable [to] resist performing the criminal act as discussed in the Irresistible Impulse test supra.
Here, we are told that Mel's subconscious desire to commit homicide was due to a mental disorder, and that under the influence of the mental disorder, Mel planned to kill Herb. It is possible that the desire that Mel experience was so overwhelming that he was under an irresistible impulse to commit the killing of Herb. The MPC approach allows irresistible impulse and thus if shown, Mel would be [found] not guilty by reason of insanity under an MPC approach Further testimony is likely needed to establish this, but it is possible that the desire was so strong that Mel would be found not guilty by reason of insanity because he was unable to resist the desire to kill due to Mel's mental disorder.
?7

(d) Durham Product Approach
Under the Durham Product approach, defendant may be found not guilty by reason of insanity if their criminal act was the product of a mental disease or defect. This approach has been criticized as being too broad and is rarely used in state jurisdictions.
Here, we are told that Mel's subconscious desire to commit homicide was due to a mental disorder, and that under the influence of the mental disorder, Mel planned to kill Herb. If it is shown that Mel's actions were a product of his mental disorder, and that he was unable to prevent himself from acting, he would likely be found not guilty by reason of insanity under the Durham approach.
?8

Answer B to Question 1
Criminal law rules apply to this question.
Mel v State: Murder
Under majority of jurisdictions, murder is divided into 1st- and 2nd- degree and is defined as a homicide committed with malice.
A homicide is the killing of [a] human being by another human being. Here, Herb was already dead before Mel shot him; thus a homicide could not take place since you cannot kill someone who is already dead. Thus Mel is not guilty of murder.
Mel v State: Attempted Murder
Attempt is where D acts with the intent to complete a specific unlawful act and performs an overt act which constitutes a substantial step towards the commission of that crime.
The crime of murder is defined as a homicide committed with malice. Murder type Malice can be proven by one of four mens rea of a deliberated and premeditated intent to kill, felony murder, intentional infliction of serious bodily injury, or wanton and willful disregard for human life. The type two are usually 1st-degree murder and the latter 2nd- degree. Intentional murder requires that D deliberates, which means they are capable of reflecting; here Mel had quite some time to think about his plan with a cool mind; thus Mel deliberated. Premeditation requires that D in fact deliberated before acting, which we are told that Mel planned carefully; thus he premeditated. Then, finally, the facts tell us that he desired to kill Herb coupled with shooting Herb's body all demonstrated intent, that is, a desire to kill Herb. All the elements are present for murder except that a homicide did not in fact take place; it was frustrated by Herb already being dead.
Attempt - Here, we are told that Mel desired to kill Herb, that he formulated a plan to kill him while he was asleep. These facts demonstrate an intent to commit a specific unlawful act [murder]. In addition, we are told that Mel takes a gun to Herb's house,
??9

goes inside and shoots Herb's body. This is clearly a substantial step towards the commission of the unlawful offense. All the elements for attempted murder are present. Whether Mel is guilty of attempt will depend on the jurisdiction due to disputed impossibility.
Factual impossibility - if the jurisdiction uses factual impossibility then Mel will be found guilty since it does not excuse specific intent crimes - crimes where D intentionally acts with the intent to complete a specific crime. Factual impossibility occurs where facts unknown to D prevent him from completing the crime he intended. Here, Mel was prevented from completing his murder of Herb only because Herb was already dead.
Legal impossibility - this is a defense against specific intent crimes. This occurs where D believes he is committing a crime which in fact does not exist and thus no crime occurred. Here, Mel believes he is killing Herb who is already in fact dead; thus he did not commit the crime of murder.
So, whether Mel is found guilty of attempted murder will depend on the jurisdiction and whether they use factual or legal impossibility as a defense against specific intent crimes.
Brent v State: Murder
An accomplice is someone who intentionally aids, abets or encourages another to commit a crime. Here, it could be said that Brent aided Mel by making sure that Herb's house was open so that Mel could complete the murder. However, for Brent to be guilty of murder as an accomplice, a murder had to have occurred and since no homicide occurred, Brent cannot be charged with murder.
Brent v State: attempted murder
Attempt- supra Homicide - supra Murder -supra Accomplice - supra
??10

If Mel can be charged with attempted murder because a legal impossibility defense is available in the jurisdiction, then Brent will also likely be guilty since he was an accomplice even though Mel did not know about his assistance. Brent did intentionally assist by opening the door to Herb's house for Mel with the specific intent that Mel kill Herb as the facts tell us was his desire.
Mel & Brent: Conspiracy
A conspiracy occurs where two or more people genuinely agree to commit an unlawful act and at least one performs an overt act in furtherance of the agreement. Here, we are told that Mel was not aware of Brent's assistance in trying to commit the murder, Brent was secretly helping him; thus there never was an agreement between the two. Without an agreement, they cannot be guilty of conspiracy.
Mel: Insanity Defense
An insanity defense would excuse Mel's unlawful conduct. Under M'Naghten a person is insane where medical or mental illness causes a defect in reason such that at the time of D's actions he is unable to understand the wrongfulness of his conduct or to appreciate the nature and quality of his actions. Here, it appears that Mel appreciates the nature and quality of his actions. He wants to kill Herb and appears to understand that shooting will kill him, so that part of his conduct does not fit an insanity defense. The part we are uncertain about is whether he understands that his acts are wrong. While the facts do not clearly point this out, we are told that he went to kill Herb at night and snuck into his room. These actions seem to indicate a desire to hide one's conduct which would insinuate an understanding that the acts were wrong. Thus, it is not likely that Mel will have an insanity defense under M'Naghten.
However, Mel might have a defense under the Model Penal Code [MPC] Insanity Defense if he's being tried under a jurisdiction that follows it instead of the M'Naghten rule. The MPC states that where due to mental defect, D lacks the substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his acts and to conform his conduct to the law. Here, Mel might be able to argue that due [to] his mental illness, he was unable to conform his
??11

actions to the law, the mental illness left him without the ability to control his actions despite knowing they were wrong.
Mel might have an insanity defense under MPC, but not under M'Naghten.
12

Question 2
Paula has owned property in a relatively undeveloped area near the top of Black Mountain for many years.
Six years ago, Telephone Company erected a cell phone transmission tower on Black Mountain not far from Paula's property.
Four years ago, Paula built a cabin on her property and began to spend most of her free time there engaging in bird watching and other outdoor activities.
Last year, Telephone Company leased space on the tower for an emergency alert siren and agreed to install the siren and to test it regularly. The site was chosen because it allows the siren's warning to carry farther than from any other site.
Telephone Company promptly installed the siren. Since its installation, it has tested the siren for a five-minute period weekly. The resulting sound is so loud as to cause Paula to stop whatever she is doing and cover her ears. It also greatly reduces the local bird population.
Two months ago, Paula sent a letter to Telephone Company outlining the effects of the siren and demanding that it cease its activities. Telephone Company has not responded to Paula's demand.
Does Paula have any claim against Telephone Company? Discuss.

13

Answer A to Question 2
Nomenclature: Paula = P; Telephone Company = T
P v. T - P may be able to sue T for the following outlined torts if all the elements outlined below are satisfied and there are no valid defenses from T on each of the torts.
1. Nuisance - Nuisance can be established either under the private nuisance theory or the public nuisance theory as outlined below.
a. Private Nuisance is present when there is a volitional act on part of the defendant that causes an unreasonable and substantial inference with the use and enjoyment of the plaintiff's property.
1. Volitional Act - is present when the defendant affirmatively undertakes an act. Here, T leases space on the tower for an emergency alert siren. In addition, T agreed to test the siren regularly. Therefore, it can reasonably be argued that there was a volitional act on part of T.
2. Unreasonable and Substantial Interference - is present when an ordinary reasonable person suffers an interference that [is] substantial and one that is unreasonable under the circumstances. Here, T's act that may be considered unreasonable would be the installation of the tower and thereafter the installation of the siren on the tower and testing it regularly. Here, P may argue that the siren did not exist 4 years ago when P built a cabin on her property. Therefore, P's argument would be that T's building of the siren on the tower was an unreasonable conduct. Usually, coming to a nuisance is not considered as a defense; however, court may consider it as a factor in determining whether the conduct of the defendant was unreasonable under the circumstances. Here, T decided to install the emergency siren at the said location because that specific location allowed the siren's warning to be carried farther than from any other site. An emergency siren is typically installed to warn people of an
??14

impending emergency and an important factor of installing such a siren is to test it regularly. Comparing the utility of T's conduct with that of P's utility in observing birds and engaging in other activities, it is likely that a court may not consider such an activity as unreasonable under the circumstances. Furthermore, facts indicate that the siren rings for 5 minutes every week. Although during those 5 minutes, P has to stop doing anything that she is doing and cover her ears, a 5 minute inconvenience for the larger good of the community may not be considered as a substantial interference. It is unlikely that P may be able to present arguments for unreasonableness and substantial interference. However, if P is able to show this to the jury, then we move ahead.
3. Use and Enjoyment - is the typical activities that are performed by ordinary reasonable people that present any use to the property and the enjoyment of the plaintiff. Here, P began to spend most of her free time at the said property engaging in bird watching and other outdoor activities. Such activities undertaken by P that may potentially be interfered with due to the defendant's act may be utilized to show that the defendant's act was impairing the use and enjoyment of P because she could not perform those activities when the siren rang.
4. Plaintiff's property - For a nuisance claim it is essential that the property belong to the plaintiff or that the plaintiff be a land occupier of that property. Here facts indicate that P owned the property. There are no discussable issues in this regard.
For any tort, it must be shown that there exists causation between the defendant's act and the injury suffered by the plaintiff. Such causation can be shown to exist by showing that actual causation exists because the defendant's act was the but for cause of the plaintiff's injuries and proximate causation can be shown to exist, if foreseeability is established that the defendant's cause would result in those injuries or harm to the plaintiff. Here, but for the defendant's act of testing the siren, P would not have to stop doing whatever she is doing and presumably the loss of bird population can be established due to the siren. It can also be argued that there is no causal link between the siren and the disappearance of the birds, but it is not done so here in absence of
15

such facts. Furthermore, it can reasonably be argued that a person may have to cover their ears and in order to do so may have to stop doing what they are doing, and therefore such harm to the plaintiff is foreseeable. Also an argument can be made that birds would be scared of loud noises and it may cause them to move away. Causation is not an issue here.
Necessity - Public necessity is a defense if the defendant did an act for the greater good of the public and in effect caused a tort to the individual plaintiff. Here, the arguments presented above for the reasonableness and the importance of the emergency siren may be utilized and may prove to be a proper public necessity in this case.
It is likely that P may be able to sue T on [the] basis of a private nuisance. However, the biggest hurdle [is] with the showing the unreasonableness and the substantial interference element of this tort. If P is able to pass that hurdle, then an appropriate action can be maintained for this tort.
b. Public Nuisance is present when the defendant's volitional act causes an interference with the health, safety and the property rights of the community at large. Usually, an action for a public nuisance is actionable only by a public representative. However, if the individual defendant suffers harm that is distinct from the harm suffered by the community at large, then an individual defendant may be able to sustain such an action. Here, the volitional element arguments will be similar to those described above. The main issue is whether P suffered a harm that was distinct from that suffered by the community at large and whether that harm was substantial as to have a cause of action. Here, the arguments for substantial will be similar as private nuisance. P will argue that her harm was different from that suffered by the community at large because she was engaged in bird watching and that facts indicate that due to the presence of the siren and its use on a regular basis, the local bird population was reduced. The facts do not indicate whether anyone else was engaged in such an activity and that they suffered such a loss. In addition, it can reasonably be argued by P that due to the location of the
??16

house the siren was probably louder for her that caused her to stop doing anything that she was doing when the siren rang. If such is the case, then P may be able to establish a case under public nuisance. However, a counterargument to this is that there may be other individuals who may be bird watching and that they may also be suffering similar cases where they have to stop their work. Usually in a nuisance case, the heightened sensitivity of the plaintiff is generally not a determining factor. Therefore, if other individuals in the community experience similarly as P or that the defendant T is able to show that P has heightened sensitivity to sound, then it is likely that P may not be able to sustain an action here under public nuisance. In absence of such facts, P may be able to sustain an action. The causation arguments will be similar as above and the damages are discussed in the preceding arguments. The necessity defense arguments will be similar as above.
2. Trespass to Land - Not likely for sound
A trespass to land is the volitional act on [the] part of the defendant that causes a physical invasion of the plaintiff's property. However, in a majority of the jurisdictions, a physical invasion of tangible things constitutes this tort. Sound may not be sufficient to establish a physical invasion in this case. However, in a minority of those jurisdictions that recognize that a sound may be sufficient invasion, we move ahead with this tort.
The volitional act on part of the defendant will be similar as above. Here, P will have to show that T intended an act that caused the physical invasion. This is also not an issue here because T leased the space with the intention to install the siren and test it regularly. If sound is a tangible thing, then it can be reasonably argued that T knew with substantial certainty that his act of testing the siren might cause the sound to invade onto other nearby properties. The elements of this tort may therefore be established in this case.
Necessity: defense argument will be similar as above.
??17

3. Negligence - Land Occupier - Activity on the Land
Negligence is present when the defendant owes a duty to the plaintiff, that such duty is breached, that causation - actual and proximate causation- is present and the defendant suffers a physical injury or property damage and that there are no valid defenses available to the defendant. Here, P did not suffer a physical injury or property damage as a result of the defendant's act. Facts only outline that P had to cover her ears and that she had to stop doing whatever she had to do. In absence of such a harm, a tort of negligence may not be actionable. Duty is present when the defendant places the plaintiff within the zone of danger created by his unreasonable act. The duty element may be established because T would be a land occupier and the presence and the operation of the siren would be considered as an activity on the land. In addition, P would be considered as a plaintiff on an adjacent property. Here, T may owe a duty towards P. However, the biggest fact would be the breach of duty. A breach of duty may be established under the Learned Hand test whereby if the burden on the defendant to take appropriate action is less than the probability of the type of the injury and the magnitude of the injury then a breach may be established. Here, as argued in the nuisance section for the unreasonableness of the conduct, it is unlikely that a breach may be established. T may not have valid defenses here.
This tort may not be actionable because a breach of duty and actual damages may not be established here.
4. Battery is the volitional act on part of the defendant with the requisite intent to cause a harmful or an offensive touching to the plaintiff's person. Here the volitional act will be similar as explained above. Here, intent may be established if it can be shown that T knew with substantial certainty that his act would cause the result. Here, T did not desire that the loud sound cause the residents in the area to have discomfort. However, T knew that the sound was very loud. Therefore, it can reasonably be argued that T knew with substantial certainty that the sound may reach the residents in the area and that such sound may cause a touching. Any minor touching or offensive touching may
??18

be sufficient for the charge of battery. Here, P would argue that the sound was so loud that it bothered her and that as a result she had to leave what she was doing and cover her ears. Such a sound may be considered to be offensive under the circumstances. However, it is possible that T may again present the necessity defense as presented above.
5. Strict Liability for abnormally dangerous activities - loud sound is actionable if P is able to show that such activity poses a high foreseeable risk, that no matter of due care would reduce that risk and that such activity is typically not conducted in the area. Here, P may be able to argue that loud sound may severely interfere with a person's hearing capability, which is evident from the fact that every time the siren rang, P had to leave whatever she was doing and cover her ears. In addition, there may be nothing that T could do because the purpose of such siren was to notify people in the community and therefore the siren had to be loud. If P is able to show that such sirens are usually not placed in the area, which is unlikely under the facts because there existed a telephone tower and that such tower could reasonably be utilized for placing a siren, and in addition facts also indicated that there was no better place for the utility of the siren. This tort may not be actionable.
6. Invasion of Privacy - Unreasonable Invasion into plaintiff's seclusion
This tort is actionable if the defendant causes an unreasonable intrusion into the plaintiff's seclusion. Here, T merely placed a siren on the tower and then tested it regularly. It was this sound that P may argue to have unreasonably intruded into her seclusion because P would argue that bird watching is typically done in silent conditions and that the siren interfered with that activity of hers. It is unlikely that a court may consider mere sound to invade someone's seclusion although the sound invaded onto the plaintiff's property.
??19

Answer B to Question 2
Does Paula have a claim against Telephone Company?
Trespass to Land
An intrusion onto the land of another. Paula will have to establish the Telephone Company (D) intentionally intruded upon or caused a thing to intrude upon her land, causation and damages.
Act
The D must have performed a volitional act.
Here, Paula will show the telephone company placed the siren on the tower and intentionally tested it weekly because the telephone company did install and tested the siren weekly and knew or should have known the sound waves would come onto her property; therefore Paula would have established intent.
Intent
The D must have intended the harm.
Here, the D intended the harm because D agreed to test it regularly; therefore this element is met.
Causation
The D must be the but-for cause of the harm suffered by Paula.
Here, Paula will show D intent and act of testing the siren was the but-for cause of the intrusion upon her land because but for the D testing the siren the sound waves would not have traveled upon her land and hurt her ears; therefore this element is met.
????20

Damages
Only nominal damages need be shown in a trespass to land case.
Here, Paula will show she has damages because weekly she has to stop what she is going to cover her ears; therefore she will have established damages.
Defenses
The phone company will contend that sound waves are not the type of intrusion upon which a trespass to land case typically supports. Therefore it is likely the court will not support Paula's claim.
Private Nuisance
For a plaintiff to be successful in a private nuisance claim they must establish a substantial interference to the use and enjoyment of their land and that the substantial interference is unreasonable under the circumstances.
Substantial Interference
An interference is substantial if a reasonable prudent person (RPP) would find the interference disturbing and annoying to the use and enjoyment of her land.
Here, the interference would be substantial because an RPP would be disturbed and annoyed at a noise so loud that it caused pain to their ears such that they would stop their current activity to protect their ears by covering them on a weekly basis; therefore this element is met.
Unreasonable
The plaintiff must show that substantial interference is unreasonable under the circumstances by comparing the nature of the interference; effect of the interference; the value society places on the use and enjoyment; the appropriateness of the location to the use and enjoyment; and the benefit of substantial interference.
?????21

Nature of the interference
What is the type of the substantial interference (SI)?
Here, the SI is a weekly blast of sound lasting for five minutes; therefore the SI occurs every week for 5 minutes.
Effect of the SI
How is the resulting effect of the SI upon the use and enjoyment?
Here, the SI encompasses all of Paula's land and beyond because the sound waves travel in all directions and are not stopped at any point; therefore the effect permeates all of Paula's land.
Value of the use and enjoyment
Is the use and enjoyment interfered with valued by society?
Here, the value of the enjoyment interfered with would be of value to society because a reasonable person would expect to enjoy their land without the interference of sounds so loud that result is pain to their ears; therefore the value of the use and enjoyment interfered with would be high.
Appropriateness of location
Is the location of the use and enjoyment with SI appropriate?
Here, the location is appropriate because one should be able to enjoy peace and quiet and avoid weekly noises loud enough to hurt their ears on their own land; therefore the location for the use and enjoyment interfered with is appropriate.
Benefit of the SI
Is the SI a benefit to the public?
?????22

Here, the D will contend the SI is of benefit to the public because by testing the siren weekly for five minute intervals the D ensures the siren works in case of an emergency; further the location ensures the siren's warning reaches farther than from any other site.
Conclusion: After weighing the factors above the SI to Paula's use and enjoyment is substantial.
Causation
Is the defendant the cause of Paula's harm?
Here, Paula can show D is the cause of her harm because but for D testing the siren weekly for a five minute period her use and enjoyment would not be substantially interfered with; therefore D is the cause of her harm.
Damages
For a nuisance action the plaintiff can receive monetary damages or an injunction to abate the nuisance.
General Damages - Paula could be awarded damages for her pain and suffering to her ears.
Injunction - Paula could obtain a court order requiring the D to cease or test less frequently the siren.
Defenses
Coming to the nuisance
If a party comes to the nuisance they typically will not be able to recover from the D.
????23

Here, D will state Paula came to the nuisance because she built a cabin on what was undeveloped property two years after the installation of the tower on which the siren was placed; therefore D will assert Paula came to the nuisance.
Here, Paula will concede that she did build two years after the erection of the tower; however the siren was placed on the tower four years after she built that cabin and as such she did not come to the nuisance; therefore Paula will have rebutted D's claim that she came to the nuisance.
Public Nuisance
A public nuisance action is typically brought by the Attorney General or another government agency to address a nuisance that effects the community at large. For a private party to bring a public nuisance claim they must suffer a harm different than the public at large. For a plaintiff they must establish a substantial interference to the use and enjoyment of their land and that the substantial interference is unreasonable under the circumstances.
Here, Paula can bring a public nuisance claim, because as analyzed above the use and enjoyment of her land is SI and the public at large is affected because the local bird population is greatly reduced; therefore Paula will have distinguished the harm she suffers from the harm suffered by the public at large.
As analyzed above the harm to her is apparent; the harm to the public at large is a reduction in bird population. If this effect on the bird population is substantial the court may require the D to change the frequency of the siren test or find another solution that provides the same benefit without causing a nuisance.
?24

Question 3
Buyer wished to upgrade its 5,000 lighting fixtures to meet new energy conservation standards, but had been unable to find compatible lighting elements.
Buyer wrote to Seller, explaining its needs. On July 1, Seller e-mailed Buyer:
We believe we can manufacture the lighting elements that you require. We are prepared to supply 5,000 at $100 each. We understand that this is much more than you anticipated paying, but the redesign to meet your specifications will not be easy. We need to do this deal by September 1. If not, we will have to turn our attention elsewhere.
Buyer was relieved that it would not need to replace its existing lighting fixtures. Buyer felt sufficiently confident that it would be able to secure funding for the purchase so it terminated ongoing negotiations with manufacturers for replacement lighting fixtures.
On August 1, Buyer received notice that funds would be available. It immediately attempted to e-mail Seller: "We got the money. We have a done deal." Seller did not, however, receive the message because Buyer sent it to the wrong e-mail address.
On August 10, Seller e-mailed Buyer:
We have reconsidered. Because of new commitments, we will not be able to supply the lighting elements as planned. Sorry.
Because its computer was down on August 10 and 11, Buyer was unaware of Seller's August 10th e-mail message.
On August 12, Buyer telephoned Seller and the following exchange ensued:
Buyer: Our computers have been down for a couple of days, but we assume you got our message. Our people are real excited about this.
Seller: What message? And we told you two days ago we could not do the lighting elements.
Seller has refused to supply the lighting elements. It will be very difficult and expensive for Buyer to acquire replacement lighting fixtures.
Can Buyer prevail in a breach of contract action against Seller? Discuss.
25

Answer A to Question 3
What Law Governs?
This contract involves a sale of lighting fixtures--that is, movable goods within the meaning of the UCC.
Buyer and Seller are apparently "merchants" within the meaning of the UCC--that is, persons [who] have special knowledge of or who regularly deal in the type of goods involving in the transaction.
Accordingly, the UCC will apply and the parties will be held to a higher standard of good faith dealing as merchants--and will also be held to other special rules applying to merchants under the UCC.
Formation
Here, the rights of the parties (and whether Buyer can successfully sue for breach of contract) will depend, first, on whether there is an enforceable contract.
For an enforceable contract, there must be (1) mutual assent, including (a) a valid offer and (b) a valid acceptance. In addition, there must [be] valid consideration (or some valid substitute for consideration), and no defenses to formation.
Preliminary Negotiations
Here, Buyer's initial letter to Seller "explaining its needs" would be considered preliminary negotiations, or a manifestation on the part of Buyer to bargain.
There are no sufficient "words of commitment," or "sufficiently definite terms," as yet; accordingly, there is no offer at this point.
???26

Offer
An offer is the offeror's manifestation of present intent to enter a bargain, sufficiently definite terms, communicated to the offeree such that the offeree would be justified in understanding that its assent is invited and will conclude the bargain.
Seller's 7/1 [e-mail] is a manifestation of Seller's "intent to enter a bargain of sufficiently definite terms."
The terms are 5,000 lighting fixtures (subject matter and quantity), at $100 each (price).
Seller is inviting Buyer's assent to the proposed bargain and Buyer would be justified, so to understand; also, it is specifying the manner in which Buyer must communicate its acceptance (by September 1).
Accordingly, as of 7/1 there is a valid offer.
Acceptance
An acceptance is the offeree's manifestation of intent to be bound by the terms of the agreement, communicated to the offeror in the authorized manner (or otherwise in any reasonable manner under the circumstances).
Here, Buyer's 8/1 e-mail was an attempted acceptance (i.e., "We got the money. We have a done deal.")
However, as the facts indicate, Buyer's attempted acceptance was never "communicated" to Seller, where Buyer accidentally "sent it to the wrong e-mail address."
Mailbox Rule / Risk of Loss of Acceptance
Generally, under the mailbox rule, an acceptance is effective "upon dispatch."
???27

However, if the offeree fails to properly transmit his acceptance, then the acceptance is not valid "upon dispatch," and the offeree bears any risk of loss.
Here, where offeree fails to properly direct his attempted acceptance to the correct e- mail address, the acceptance is not effective "upon dispatch," and the offeree "bears the risk" of its subsequent loss.
Accordingly, here, there is no valid acceptance.
Revocation / Lapse
An offer may be terminated at any time prior to acceptance, in any of several ways, including (1) rejection, (2) counteroffer, (3) impossibility (due to death or incapacity, destruction of subject matter, or supervening illegality), (4) lapse, and (5) revocation.
A revocation is the offeror's withdrawal of its offer, communicated either directly or indirectly to the offeree, at any time prior to acceptance.
In its e-mail, Seller has communicated to Buyer its intent to withdraw its offer and has done so to Buyer's acceptance.
Accordingly, Seller's 8/10 e-mail would be considered a revocation.
Mailbox Rule, Risk of Loss of Revocation
Under the mailbox rule, the offeror's revocation is normally not effective until it is actually, physically received by the offeree.
Here, Seller properly addresses and sends the e-mail revoking its offer on August 10. However, Buyer never "receives" Seller's e-mail prior to Buyer's and Seller's telephone conversation on August 12.
??28

Under the mailbox rule, where Seller properly addressed its e-mail, but it was never received because of the failure on Buyer's end to have functioning computers, with which to check its e-mail, Buyer would likely "bear the risk" of the loss of Seller's revocation up to that point.
In any case, as [per] Buyer's and Seller's 8/12 telephone conversation, Seller's has definitively revoked its offer by confirming the content of the e-mail sent two days prior.
Accordingly, as 8/12 Seller has terminated Buyer's "power of acceptance" and there is no enforceable contract between the parties.
Promissory Estoppel
An issue arises here as to whether Seller's initial offer of 7/1 to sell Buyer the fixtures it requires--and Buyer's subsequent reliance on that promise--entitles Buyer to enforcement of Seller's promise on a theory [of] promissory estoppel.
Promissory estoppel applies where the offeror (1) has made a promise; (2) should anticipate that the making of that promise will likely induce the offeree upon that promise; (3) the offeree is in fact induced to reasonably rely on the offeror's promise; and (4) to not enforce the offeror's promise would result in an injustice, despite the absence of an enforceable contract between the parties.
Here, we are told that the lighting fixtures Buyer seeks are a special order item, that Buyer is depending on being able to obtain this specific type of new energy saving fixtures, that Buyer has terminated ongoing negotiations with other potential supplies in reliance on Seller's promise, and gone to considerable lengths to obtain the necessary financing for the transaction.
Buyer has relied on Seller's initial promise--and perhaps reasonably so. Moreover, where Seller assured Buyer that its offer would remain open until 9/1, Seller is perhaps
?29

justified in understanding that it can rely on Buyer's promise, even where Seller did not receive its initial acceptance.
Accordingly, a court may enforce Seller's promise despite the absence of an enforceable contract, based on a theory of promissory estoppel.
UCC Firm Offer
Under the UCC, a merchant may hold an offer open for up to three months, so long as that offer is made in writing and signed "by the party to be charged" (here, Seller).
Since Seller's 7/1 offer assuring Buyer it will hold its offer open through 9/1 is not a signed writing, Buyer will be unable to assert that Seller's 7/1 offer is a UCC firm offer.
However, as noted, a court may still enforce the contract on a theory of promissory estoppel.
Breach
A material breach is a party's failure to perform a contractual duty which substantially deprives the non-breaching party of his or her expectation under the contract.
Here, there is no breach because, as noted, there is no enforceable contract.
Nonetheless, as noted, a court may enforce Seller's promise on a theory of promissory estoppel.
Damages
Specific Performance
A court may order specific performance of a sale contract where the goods involved are unique.
????30

Here, the light fixtures in question are apparently difficult to find and will require special manufacturing by Seller.
Accordingly, because the light fixtures in question are "unique," the court may order specific performance of the contract, on a theory of promissory estoppel.
Expectation Damages
Alternately, the court may award Buyer compensatory damages equivalent to Buyer's expected "benefit-of-the-bargain," for the purpose of placing Buyer in the same position Buyer would have been had Seller completely performed its promise.
Here, the amount of compensatory damages would be either the difference between the market price and the contract price of the fixtures or, if Buyer is able to "cover" through another supplier, the difference between the "cover price" and the "contract price" of the fixtures.
In addition, Buyer would [be] entitled to incidental or consequential damages incurred as a result of Seller's breach of its promise.
?31

Buyer v. Seller
Answer B to Question 3
In order to prevail in a breach of contract action, Buyer will have to show he has an enforceable contract with Seller.
If a contract involves the sale of goods, the UCC will be the governing law. Otherwise, the common law will govern. When a contract involves both services and a sale of goods, courts look to the predominant aspect of the contract and whether it is divisible. If it is divisible, parts can be governed by separate, relevant law. If not, the predominant aspect will determine which law will take precedence. Here, this potential contract is not divisible since both sides cannot be divided into two or more equal parts. Buyer will simply buy the fixtures (i.e. one act). Therefore, it must be determined whether service or a sale of a product is the predominant aspect of this contract. Since the facts state that the "redesign ... will not be easy," this would suggest that the service is the predominant aspect. Also, Buyer "had been unable to find compatible lighting elements." This might suggest Seller's work to redesign is highly unique, once again making this contract predominantly a service one. However, the product was the final desired product of the potential contract. It is debatable which law will govern; therefore, both laws will be referred to below.
Did Buyer have an enforceable contract with Seller?
Contract formation requires mutual assent plus consideration. There must be an offer and an acceptance supported by consideration.
Was there an offer?
An offer is an objectively manifested intent to be bound by definite, certain terms communicated to an identified offeree. Here, Seller's e-mail on July 1st contains an intent to be bound (i.e. "We are prepared to supply ..."). And, this intent was communicated to Buyer by e-mail. The UCC requires only one term to make a sufficient
??32

offer while other terms may be filled by the courts. This term is quantity. Here, Seller's e-mail identifies the quantity of elements to be supplied, so it would be sufficient terms for the UCC. At common law, the terms required were subject matter, parties, quantity, price and time of performance. Here, Seller's e-mail identifies the parties, subject matter, quantity and price, yet it leaves the time for performance out. This would not be necessarily fatal as courts could imply a reasonable amount of time if the work were to begin by September 1st. It appears that most likely Buyer did receive a valid offer.
Could Seller revoke his offer?
An offer may be revoked at any time before it is accepted unless it is irrevocable. There are three types of irrevocable offers: an option, a Merchant's Firm Offer and an equitable option. No consideration was paid by Buyer to keep Seller's offer open, so an option is not applicable here. Under the UCC, an offer made in a signed writing by a merchant will remain irrevocable for the time stated in the writing without consideration. Here, Seller's e-mail was in writing, and courts will most likely find its electronic identification sufficient for a signature. Also, Seller appears to be a merchant since it manufactures lighting elements. The factual debate would occur as to whether Seller's statement "We need to do this deal by September 1" is suggesting Buyer has until that time to accept. The language is not definitive; however, Seller goes on to write "If not, we will have to turn our attention elsewhere." This following statement does seem to suggest that Seller will make itself available to Buyer's needs until September 1. It is likely Seller's e-mail will be considered a Merchant's Firm Offer and irrevocable if the governing law is the UCC. Also, Buyer might rely on an equitable option theory. When an offeree detrimentally, reasonably and foreseeably relies upon a promise, the offeror cannot revoke his offer. Here, Buyer "terminated ongoing negotiations" in reliance upon Seller's offer. However, there are no facts to suggest that Seller knew or could foresee that Buyer would rely on their offer in this regard. It is likely that an equitable option would not be found, and Seller could revoke his offer at common law.
?33

Did Buyer accept the offer on August 1st?
An acceptance is an objectively manifested intent to be bound to the terms of an offer communicated in a manner invited by the offer. Here, Buyer attempted to communicate his intent to be bound by Seller's offer, but he e-mailed the wrong address. Under the mailbox rule, an acceptance is effective upon dispatch if it is properly addressed. It is likely that the courts would find that this attempted acceptance was not effective upon dispatch since it was addressed incorrectly.
Did Seller revoke his offer on August 10th?
A revocation is a communication by an offeror received by the offeree stating that the offer is no longer available and the offeree no longer has the power to accept and form a contract. Here on August 10th, Seller e-mailed Buyer and attempted to revoke its offer. However since Buyer's computers were down, it is arguable whether he received the attempted revocation or not. This would be a debatable point. It would have to be decided if electronic reception that is stored and unable to be accessed by a person's usual computers is sufficient to constitute reception of a revocation. Since persons can usually check their e-mail on the internet, it will most likely be determined that this revocation was received and effective. Nevertheless if the UCC governs this claim, Seller could not revoke his offer since it would most likely be deemed a Merchant's Firm Offer.
Did Buyer accept the offer on August 12th?
Please reference the required elements of an acceptance above. Here, Buyer referred Seller to his message from August 1st which Seller did not receive. Since this reference does not explicitly communicate an acceptance and the previous message is most likely ineffective due to the incorrect e-mail address, it is highly unlikely this statement constitutes an acceptance. Furthermore, Seller expresses the revocation directly afterwards, and this time, Buyer hears it (i.e. receives it). So, the offer is highly likely to be deemed revoked here. Buyer would then not have an enforceable contract and would have no recovery. Yet once again if the UCC is governing, Buyer still could accept, which according to the facts there is no evidence he ever did.
???34

Would this contract have sufficient consideration?
Consideration exists when there is a current, bargained-for exchange and both parties incur new legal detriment as a result of the bargain. Here, Seller will have to manufacture and sell lighting fixtures which it is not legally obligated to do, and Buyer will have to purchase them. And since both parties bargained with each other for these rights, consideration would exist if a valid acceptance could be found by Buyer's reference to his undelivered e-mail.
Would Seller be able to raise any defenses?
The Statute of Frauds requires the sale of goods for $500 or more to be in writing. Seller's e-mail from July 1 would be a sufficient signed writing by the party to be charged since it includes the quantity, price and an electronic signature. This defense would not be successful.
??35

Question 4
Victoria lived in a house with her roommates Ben and Carl. One night, Albert entered the house through an unlocked, but closed, back door and went into Victoria's bedroom. Albert removed a partially full bottle of whiskey and a knife from his pockets, and threatened to harm Victoria if she screamed.
At that point, Ben and Carl discovered Albert in Victoria's room. Catching sight of Ben and Carl, Albert took off running. Ben said to Carl, "Let's get him!" Ben and Carl chased Albert out of the house and down the front stairs. Albert got into a vehicle and drove away. Ben and Carl jumped into a neighbor's vehicle, which had its keys in the ignition, and sped after Albert.
Ben and Carl caught up with Albert in a deserted shopping center. Ben drove into the passenger side of Albert's vehicle and pushed it until its driver's side came to rest against the wall of a building, trapping Albert inside. No one was injured. At that time, the police arrived and arrested Albert, Ben, and Carl.
1. What crimes, if any, might Albert reasonably be charged with, and what defenses, if any, might he reasonably assert? Discuss.
2. What crimes, if any, might Ben and Carl reasonably be charged with, and what defenses, if any, might they reasonably assert? Discuss.
36

Answer A to Question 4
1. What crimes, if any, might Albert reasonably be charged with, and what defenses, if any, might he reasonably assert?
Burglary:
Common law burglary is the breaking and entering of the dwelling house of another at night with the intent to commit a felony therein. Modernly, it is the breaking and entering of the protected structure with the intent to commit a crime.
Breaking: A breaking does not have to be an actual physical breaking. Here, the back door of Victor's house was closed but unlocked. Albert had to physically open the door, which is considered a breaking to satisfy the breaking element for Burglary.
Entering: Carl entered the house of Victoria, which is her protected structure.
Intent to commit a crime: Here, we do not know why Albert broke into the house and what intent he had prior to entering the house. If one assumes that since he was carrying a knife and made his way to Victoria's room then he was there to commit a crime against Victoria. It does not say that Albert stopped to remove property, but he entered and went to Victoria's bedroom. Therefore, if Albert intended to enter the house to harm Victoria prior to his entering the home the intent element for Burglary would be satisfied.
If Albert entered the house intending to harm Victoria, then we have a Burglary for which Albert can be charged.
???37

Assault:
The defendant is putting the victim in an immediate fear or oppression of a harmful or offensive touching. Here, upon Albert entering Victoria's home, he walked into her bedroom, pulled a knife from his pocket and threatened to harm Victoria if she screamed. A person who sees an [un]invited intruder standing in their bedroom holding a knife threatening to harm her if she screamed would be in fear of an immediate harm or offensive touching. Albert can be charged with assault.
Albert can be charged with assault as he threatened her with a knife, which would put Victoria in apprehension of a touching.
Defenses:
Voluntary Intoxication: Albert is going to raise the defense that he was voluntarily intoxicated and was unable to form any intent to commit a crime or harm a person. The facts state that he pulled out a partially full bottle of whiskey from his pockets. It does not say how much or little whiskey had been consumed or if Albert was acting in any way intoxicated. Given the fact that he was able to enter the home, head straight to Victoria's room without alerting Ben or Carl, [it is likely] that Albert did not manifest an intoxication level.
While Albert will raise the voluntary intoxication defense it will not succeed.
2. What crimes, if any, might Ben and Carl reasonably be charged with, and what defenses, if any, might they reasonably assert?
?38

Ben
Solicitation:
Solicitation is where one party asks another party to commit a criminal act. Here, Ben looks at Carl and says, "Let's get him!" This is a solicitation for a crime.
Merger: Solicitation merges into the crime of conspiracy.
Conspiracy: A conspiracy is an agreement between two people to commit a criminal act.
Agreement: The agreement between the two individuals can be express or implied. Here, Ben looked at Carl and said "Let's get him" and they both chased after Albert. There is a valid agreement between Ben and Carl.
Act in Furtherance: There needs to be an act in furtherance of the agreement in order for there to be a conspiracy. Here, Ben and Carl both started chasing Albert and chased him out of the house and out into the street. Their actions proved they were going to get Albert.
Criminal Act: What criminal acts exactly are Ben and Carl trying to commit? They are chasing a person who was in their home without permission, holding a knife to their roommate, threatening her. Did they know what they would do when they caught him? From the facts it appears they were trying to defend their roommate and property and did not intend to commit a criminal act.
39

There is no conspiracy
Larceny: Trespassory Taking and Carrying away [of] the personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here, Ben and Carl jumped into their neighbor's car which had the keys in the ignition and sped off after Albert. They trespassed, took and carried away the personal property of another with the driving away of the neighbor's car.
Intent to permanently deprive: Did Ben have the intent to permanently deprive the neighbor of the car? Given the fact he was chasing after a person who had just broken into their house and threatened their roommate with a knife, and there are no facts to indicate that any intent was made other than the car was readily accessible to aid Ben in chasing after Albert. Given there is no intent shown that Ben intended to permanently deprive the neighbor of the car, a larceny charge will not be proved.
As the intent to permanently deprive is missing from this crime, Ben will not be charged with larceny.
Assault - supra
Albert has an immediate apprehension of fear of a harmful or offensive touching by Ben. Albert knew that Ben was out to get him and knew that he would be harmed if they caught him.
Battery: Harmful or offensive touching of another.
Here, Ben took the car he was driving and drove the car into the side of Albert's car until Albert's driver side [door] would not open. A harmful or offensive touching can be an extension of your person and the car is an extension of Albert and when Ben hit Albert's car, it can be viewed as a battery.
?40

False Imprisonment: False imprisonment is where the defendant confines the victim to a bounded area where there are no means of escape.
Here, after Ben drove the car into the wall to block the driver's side escape and used Ben's car to block the passenger side escape, Albert had no way to leave his car and was in fact bound to an area with no means of escape.
Since Ben had no means of escape, he would be confined to a space against his will.
Assault, Battery and False Imprisonment can all be proved by the facts.
Defenses:
Defense of Third Party: Ben will have an excellent defense that he was defending his roommate and as such shall not be liable for any of the charges.
Defense of Property: Albert had entered Ben's property also, and he can claim that he was using reasonable force to protect his property.
Crime Prevention: The defense that will work best is that Ben was trying to stop a fleeing felon who posed a risk of danger to the public. Ben had just found Albert in his home, [in] his female roommate's bedroom, where he was threatening her with a knife. Ben was not sure what this person would do or who would be the next person to be injured and by chasing after him he wanted to stop him from fleeing so that the police could take him into custody and protect the public.
Carl:
Conspiracy: Supra
41

Pinkerton: The Pinkerton Rule states that a coconspirator will be liable for all foreseeable crimes that happen as a result of the conspiracy crime. Here, It is foreseeable that when you are chasing someone, you will have an assault, battery and false imprisonment, when you state "Let's get him". However, we determined there was no conspiracy.
Accomplice: Carl was present with Ben during these acts and can be seen as an accomplice to the crimes of Assault, Battery, False Imprisonment.
Larceny: Supra
Defenses: Supra
Carl would defend on the fleeing felon defense and would proceed to not be charged with the crimes as he was trying to protect the public from a fleeing felon who posed a risk to the public.
42

STATE V. ALBERT
Answer B to Question 4
?BURGLARY
At common law, burglary was the breaking and entering of the dwelling of another during the night with the intent to commit a felony therein. Modernly, the requirements of breaking and night hours are usually omitted, and the structure entered can be any structure. A theft may be intended rather than a felony per se.
Breaking and entering: Even though the front door was unlocked, Albert opened it., Creating the opening of entry constitutes breaking. Further, Albert "entered the house."
Dwelling of another: This was Victoria's and her roommates' house, so it is the dwelling of another and satisfies a common law or modern version of burglary.
Night: The facts state this happened "one night," satisfying either common law or modern burglary.
Intent to commit a felony: The facts do not give us Albert's intent. Circumstantial evidence of entering Victoria's bedroom at night, the only female of the house, with alcohol and a knife could suggest an intent to commit rape. Alternatively, Albert assaulted her as will be discussed below. However, we cannot assume that he entered with this intent.
It is not fully clear that Albert had the specific intent necessary for burglary, but a strong case on circumstantial evidence can be made.
???????43

ASSAULT
Criminal assault is an attempted causing of harmful or offensive contact or the placing of another in apprehension of imminent harmful or offensive contact, coupled with present ability. Albert threatened to harm Victoria and showed her a knife. This was a threat of imminent harm because he would be harming her in that instant if she screamed. Albert may assert that his threat was conditional -- "if she screamed." However, he cannot excuse his conduct by a conditional threat. He should be found guilty of assault.
ATTEMPTED RAPE
Rape is sexual intercourse by a man without consent with a woman not one's wife, at common law. Modernly, the wife is not excluded as a possible victim and either gender may be a victim or defendant.
An Attempt occurs when a defendant takes acts that, if successful, would have resulted in the commission of a certain target crime. It requires proof of 1) an intent to commit the target crime; and 2) a substantial step that shows unequivocal intent to commit the target crime. Here, as discussed above, Albert's intent can only be inferred from the circumstances. If intent is established, his breaking and entering with a weapon in hand coupled with his threat provides the necessary substantial step. Albert will argue that he did not come close to a result as he took no actions initiating intercourse, but modern courts do not require close proximity to the act. Pending establishment of intent, he could well be found guilty of attempted rape.
CRIMINAL TRESPASS
This is entry upon clearly marked property of another. Albert did enter the house of other people, so he could be charged with criminal trespass. He has no apparent defense other than intoxication, discussed below.
???44

DEFENSE OF VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION
At common law, such a defense only applied to negate specific intent crimes. Modernly, it may be a defense if it negates the mens rea. Since Albert has a partially consumed bottle of whiskey, it can be inferred that he drank the other half and is intoxicated. However, the facts don't show if this is so. If he was intoxicated, this could negate the intent to commit a felony necessary for burglary, negate the intent to place in apprehension of assault, and negate the specific intent to rape necessary for attempted rape. It would not be a defense for criminal trespass, which is a general intent crime that requires only the intent to commit the entry.
STATE V. BEN
SOLICITATION
Defined as inciting or encouraging one to commit a crime. Ben said to Carl, "Let's get him!" which may be seen as an invitation to commit an assault or battery or both on Albert. It requires intent to commit target crime, an intent to solicit, and an actual request. Ben did want to "get" Albert and did request help from Carl intentionally. If convicted of solicitation, this would merge with conspiracy and the crime itself.
CONSPIRACY TO ASSAULT/BATTERY
A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act or a lawful act by unlawful means. It requires 1) intent to agree; 2) intent to commit the target crime; and 3) an agreement to commit the crime. Some jurisdictions also require an overt act, not necessarily unlawful, by any one of the conspirators, at least where the crime is not serious.
As above, Ben intended to agree with Carl to "get" Albert with the purpose of "getting" Albert. Carl responded with actions by accompanying Ben. The overt act was the giving chase. Thus, a conspiracy was formed to commit battery and/or assault on Albert.
???45

ASSAULT
Defined above. Ben placed Albert in apprehension of imminent harm by chasing him on foot and by car. An assault occurred, though Ben has defenses below.
BATTERY
Criminal battery is the application of unlawful force with intent, recklessness, or negligence. Ben drove his car into Albert's car and pinned him to the wall. He seems to have acted with intent since he said he wanted to "get him" and had been chasing him. Ben will argue that nobody was harmed, but this is still an offensive force. Ben will argue that he never made contact with Albert's body, but the force can be applied via objects connected to the victim and/or defendant. Ben controlled his car, which touched Albert's car, which impacted Albert. A battery occurred, though Ben has defenses below.
LARCENY
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with the intent to deprive the owner permanently.
Trespassory taking. Ben had no permission to take the car that he jumped into while pursuing Albert. This is a trespassory taking.
Carrying Away. Driving off with the property is a carrying away, and Ben "drove away."
Personal Property of Another. A car is personal property and it belonged to a "neighbor."
Intent to Deprive Permanently. Ben may argue he intended to return the car. However, acting in a manner that makes it little likely that the owner will receive his property is tantamount to intent to deprive permanently. Chasing a criminal -- he "sped away" -- qualifies as such a manner.
???????46

Ben fulfills all the criteria of larceny, though he may have defenses below.
DEFENSES
Defense of Others. One is entitled to use reasonable force necessary to defend others from unlawful force. Most courts now give the benefit of a reasonable mistake. Here, Victoria was privileged to use force to defend herself from a knife-wielding trespasser. This gave Ben privilege to defend her as well. All he did was give chase in response to deadly force, so he did not exceed the permissible scope. This defense should shield him from the assault charge. It may also shield him from the battery charge although he may have exceeded the scope in using the car as a deadly force even after the initial aggressor was in retreat since he rammed his car into Albert after Albert was running away. Acquittal of Assault and/or battery would entail acquittal of solicitation and/or conspiracy for those charges as well.
Arrest of Felon. One is entitled to use reasonable force to effect the capture of a person who has committed a felony or breach of the peace in one's presence. Here, Albert is at least guilty of trespass and assault if not attempted rape. Ben was privileged to assault him when he chased him from the house. However, deadly force is only permitted if the fleeing suspect is a clear threat to the defendant or to others. It is not clear that Albert posed any threat during the car chase, so the deadly force of ramming a car into another car may have exceeded the scope in the charge of battery. Ben may also try to raise this defense against the larceny, though the victim of this force was the neighbor instead of the suspect. This defense should not work for larceny.
Prevention of Crime. One is entitled to use reasonable force in prevention of crime. Ben was preventing a battery or rape from being perpetrated on Victoria. His initial assault of Albert is privileged, though he will lose this defense in the battery charge since Albert was no longer in danger of committing any crime at that point.
?????47

STATE V. CARL
CONSPIRACY TO ASSAULT/BATTERY
A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act or a lawful act by unlawful means. It requires 1) intent to agree; 2) intent to commit the target crime; and 3) an agreement to commit the crime. Some jurisdictions also require an overt act, not necessarily unlawful, by any one of the conspirators, at least where the crime is not serious.
Carl responded to Ben's call to "get him" with actions by accompanying Ben. The overt act was the giving chase. Thus, a conspiracy was formed to commit battery and/or assault on Albert.
ASSAULT
Assault defined above.
Carl placed Albert in apprehension of imminent harm by chasing him on foot and by car. An assault occurred, though Carl has defenses below.
BATTERY (ACCOMPLICE)
An accomplice is one who aids or abets another in the commission of a crime and thereby incurs liability for that crime as well. It requires 1) an intent to assist; 2) an intent to commit the target crime; and 3) acts that assist the principal. Under the MPC, even attempted assistance incurs accomplice liability.
As above, Ben committed a battery on Albert when he rammed his car into him. Carl provided assistance by lending moral support since Ben knew Carl would help him in any subsequent confrontation as he had helped him up to this point. Thus, Carl is an accomplice to battery, though he has defenses below.
????48

LARCENY
As analyzed for Ben, Carl will be charged with larceny though with possible defenses below. He may argue he was not the driver, and therefore not the taker, but he should be seen as constructively taking or as an accomplice.
DEFENSES
Defense of Others. One is entitled to use reasonable force necessary to defend others from unlawful force. Most courts now give the benefit of a reasonable mistake. Here, Victoria was privileged to use force to defend herself from a knife-wielding trespasser. This gave Carl privilege to defend her as well. All he did was give chase in response to deadly force, so he did not exceed the permissible scope. This defense should shield him from the assault charge. It may also shield him from the battery charge although he may have exceeded the scope in using the car as a deadly force even after the initial aggressor was in retreat since he rammed his car into Albert after Albert was running away. Acquittal of Assault and/or battery would entail acquittal of solicitation and/or conspiracy for those charges as well.
Arrest of Felon. One is entitled to use reasonable force to effect the capture of a person who has committed a felony or breach of the peace in one's presence. Here, Albert is at least guilty of trespass and assault if not attempted rape. Carl was privileged to assault him when he chased him from the house. However, deadly force is only permitted if the fleeing suspect is a clear threat to the defendant or to others. It is not clear that Albert posed any threat during the car chase, so the deadly force of ramming a car into another car may have exceeded the scope in the charge of battery. Carl may also try to raise this defense against the larceny, though the victim of this force was the neighbor instead of the suspect. This defense should not work for larceny.
Prevention of Crime. One is entitled to use reasonable force in prevention of crime. Carl was preventing a battery or rape from being perpetrated on Victoria. His initial
????49

assault of Albert is privileged, though he will lose this defense in the battery charge since Albert was no longer in danger of committing any crime at that point.
50


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2011
1
California First-Year Law Students' Examination

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2011 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2011 California First- Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject Page 
Contracts 4
Criminal Law 15 
Contracts 27
???Torts
39
2

October 25, 2011
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all four (4) questions. Time allotted: 4 hours
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?3

?????Question 1
On June 1, Betty faxed FeedCo a letter, expressing an interest in purchasing pigs. In response, FeedCo faxed Betty an unsigned document entitled "Pig Sales Agreement," which, among other things, provided:
Buyer agrees to purchase from Seller, and Seller agrees to sell to Buyer, approximately 1050 pigs each month during the term of this agreement, at a purchase price of $33.25 per pig. Buyer shall purchase all of her feed requirements from Seller. The term of the agreement is three years. The agreement will be interpreted in accordance with the law of Washington.
On June 10, Betty signed and returned the document to FeedCo after making the following changes: (1) adding "+/- 20 head" to the phrase regarding the number of pigs to be purchased; (2) adding "for so long as the prices of FeedCo's feed are competitive with other suppliers" to the sentence requiring her to purchase her feed requirements from FeedCo; and (3) changing the choice of law provision from Washington to California.
On June 25, FeedCo presented Betty with a revised document signed by FeedCo. The revised document included Betty's change about competitive prices, and provided a contract commencement date of June 29. It did not include Betty's changes about the number of pigs to be purchased or about the choice of law provision. Betty again made those two changes to the document, initialed her changes, signed it, and returned it to FeedCo.
On June 29, Betty agreed to accept, and actually accepted, delivery of 1050 pigs from FeedCo for $33.25 per pig.
On July 15, Betty received a further revised document signed by FeedCo. Once again, it did not include her changes about the number of pigs to be purchased or about the choice of law provision. At this point, Betty advised FeedCo that she would not accept any more pigs because they did not have a contract.
Can FeedCo prevail in a breach of contract action against Betty? Discuss.
???4

Answer A to Question 1
Feedco vs. Betty
Feedco will prevail against Betty in a breach of contract action against Betty.
Applicable Law
UCC is applicable to the sales of goods (moveable tangible things). All others
are under the ruling of common law.
Predominant factor test or the gravamen injury test are used to determine the
predominant applicable law, when the contract is combination of goods and services. Here, the transaction is dealing with 1) purchasing of pigs and feed.
Therefore, the applicable law is UCC. Merchant
Merchant is someone holds special knowledge in goods of kind in the contract, or someone who frequently dealing with the goods
Here, Feedco is a merchant and Betty is not. Valid Contract
The requirement for valid contract consists of mutual assent and consideration without defense to formation.
Offer
Under contract law an offer is defined as an outward manifestato of present intent with definite essential terms communicated to the offeree thus creates a power of accepting. Under UCC the essential term is quantity. Court will apply gap fills for unspecified terms.
06/1 Letter an Offer?
Here, Betty faxed co a letter of inquiry. under contract law the letter that does not include all essential terms. Therefore, this is not an offer.
06/11 Feedco's Response
Merchants Firm Offer
A signed writtig by merchant with identified essential terms is irrevocable for the time stated or the minimum period of three months Here, Feedco stated in the agreement, 1050 pigs each month, for term of 3 yrs, with the price of $33.25. Byer will
????????5

purchase feed required, and agreement in respect in accorans with Washington law. Therefore, this is a valid offer.
An Offer for Requiment Contract
Under contract law, a requirment contract allows Buyer to purchase it's requirmt in good faith and not disproportional to it's needs. Requirmy contract does not require separated insidenter. Here, the agreemt states that Betty will purchase all feed requiment from Feedco. Therefore, this is an offer for required contract on the part of the contract that is dealing with feed.
Acceptant
Under contract law acceptance is unequivocal assent to the offer by the offee. Acceptance with Additional and Different Terms Under UCC
Acceptance with additional terms will become a part of the contract as long as it does not
1) material alter the term of the contract
2) iron clad offer
3) objection by the offeror in a reasonable time
Here, the addition terms are the following 1) Additing +/- 20 heads to the purchase
Here, the additin pigs does not violate the terms above.
Therefore, this become a part of the contract. 2) Price of the Feed Being Competitive
Here, the terms was accepted by Feedco.
Therefore, this become a part of the contract. 3) In Accordance to California Law
Here, the different term became a material alteration. The court will rule that different terms base on the previous trade 1) use 2) performce and previs course of dealig. Since, there were not previs course dealig stated in the facts, court will unlikely to allow theis material change in the contract.
Therefore, items 1) and 2) not 3) allowed into the integration of the contract. Consideratio
Under contract law is defined as bargain and for exhnge for legal detrimt.
???????6

Here, Betty agreed to buy and Feedco agreed to sell. Where both parties are not legally obligated to do Therefore, this is considerate
Consideratio for Requirmt Contract
Please see discussed under offer. Valid Contract
Here, a valid contract was formed on June, 10 with terms discused supra. 06/25 Objectin Made by Feedco
Here, the onjectin was made 10 days after Betty's acceptan on June/ 10, which may not be valid in court, In addition a valid contract was formed on June/ 10.
Therefore, this objectin was not valid under contract law. 06/29 Betty's Accepne of Goods /SoF Requmnt Satisfid
Here, Betty accepted the delivy of 1050 pigs further validated an existnce of a contract. Also, Here acceptane satisfied the requrmnt for SOF (for goods > 500 that the writg is required.
Defense to Enforcemt
SOF
Please see discussed above Condition
Under contract law an event must occur prior to absolute performece.
Here, there was no condition stated in the facts for condition prevalent, concomit, or subsequent.
Therefore, this element is preset. 7/15/11
Anticipaty Repudiato (AR)
Under contract law AR is defined as unequal language stating the party is not
goigng to perform. The aggrieved party may 1) urging retract 2) file a breach of contract law sue 3) wait for performce of the breaching party.
Here, Betty stated nonperfmce and Feedco can exercise the above options.
Therefore, Feedco can sue for Breach of action. Remedy
General damage
??????????7

Under contract is defined as the expency of the benefit from the contract. Here, Feedco may be entitled for general dmge.
Special damage
Under contract law is defined as the consequential damage flowing from the breach of contract plus incidental damage.
Therefore, Feedco is entitled for special dmge.
?8

FEEDCO v BETTY
Answer B to Question 1
?What Law Applies
Contracts for the sale of goods are governed by the Uniform Commercial Code. Goods are moveable, tangible items identifiable at the time of the contract. This contract is for the purchase of pigs and feed. Pigs and feed are moveable tangible items, therefore goods.
The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) will govern this contract.
Merchants
A merchant is one who regularly deals in or holds himself out to have special skill or knowledge in the goods involved. Here FeedCo (F) has the ability to sell 1050 pigs per month to a buyer as well as the food required to feed those. Because FeedCo regularly deals in pigs and pig food, they are a merchant under the UCC.
Betty is purchasing 1050 pigs per month. It can be inferred from the number of pigs that she is purchasing that Betty has a farm that processes pigs. Therefore, Betty will be considered a merchant under the UCC.
Contract
A contract is a promise or set of promises which the law will enforce and for the breach of which a remedy is available. A contract consists of a mutual assent (valid offer and acceptance) and sufficient consideration.
Offer
On June 1, Betty (B) faxed F a letter which stated that she was interested in purchasing some pigs. An offer, under the UCC requires quantity and identification of parties. Here
????9

the parties are B and F, however, B did not include a quantity, therefore this is not an offer but an invitation to negotiate.
In response to B's fax, F faxed a letter which provided more definite terms. Quantity - 1050 pigs, time of performance - each month for three years, Identity of Parties - B and F, Price - $33.25 per pig, no price for feed, Subject matter - pigs and feed.
Because the terms were stated with specificity, this will be considered a valid offer by F to B.
Acceptance
Under common law an acceptance is an unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer. Under the UCC an acceptance is a definite and seasonable expression of acceptance even if it contains terms different than or in addition to the terms of the offer.
Here B signed and returned the document on June 10, but made changes to the terms. She changed the quantity to give or take 20 pigs, and added a condition on the terms of the requirements contract (infra) regarding the food. She also changed the state within which any breach claims are to be disputed from Washington to California.
Because B signed and faxed back the offer, she has communicated a definite expression of acceptance.
Therefore, there is a valid acceptance
Consideration
Consideration is that which is bargained for and given in exchange for a return promise.
Here B agreed to pay $33.25 per pig and a reasonably competitive price for the feed. F agreed to provide B with pigs and feed. Therefore, there is sufficient consideration.
??10

Installment Contract
An installment contract is one wherein delivery is to be made in installments. Here B has agreed to buy and F has agreed to sell pigs and feed delivered monthly for three years. Therefore this is an installment contract.
Requirements Contract
A requirements contract under the UCC provides that the buyer will act in good faith to order that which is required by her. Here B agreed to buy as much feed as required for her pigs from F. Therefore, B is required to act in good faith to order that amount of feed which she requires.
Conditions
A condition is an act or event the happening of which either creates or extinguishes an absolute duty to perform.
Here B inserted a condition precedent to her duty to purchase feed. The condition is that the feed remain priced competitively. Therefore, as long as F keeps their prices at a commercially reasonable competitive price, B's duty to perform (pay) becomes due.
Further, B's duty to pay becomes due after F has delivered the pigs. Therefore, B is not required to pay unless F delivers the pigs.
Additional and Different Terms 2-207
Under the UCC an expression of acceptance is an acceptance even if it contains different or additional terms. The terms will become part of the contract unless they materially alter the contract, the other merchant objects within a reasonable time, or the offeror has expressly limited the contract to the terms in the offer.
Number of Pigs
The offer from F states that the number of pigs delivered each moth is to be 1050. In B's acceptance she added a "give or take 20" term to the quantity of the pigs. F did not
??????11

object to this added term, however, also did not include it in their confirmation letter received by B on June 25. When Betty initialed her changes, she again added the "give or take" term and returned it to F.
20 pigs either way of 1050 is not a material change. F did not expressly limit the acceptance to the terms of their offer and F did not expressly object to the added terms. Therefore, this term becomes part of the contract and B is entitled to order 1050 pigs give or take 20 each month.
Choice of Law
B also changed the law provision from Washington to California. F did not expressly limit acceptance to the terms of the offer, and did not object to the different term stated (California vs. Washington law). F will argue that the law provision is a material fact and therefore did not become part of the contract, however acceptance was still valid. B will argue that the provision of law was an important factor and that because she added that provision twice to F's documents, she expressly indicated that acceptance was limited to their acceptance of her different and additional terms. However, B did not specifically state that acceptance is dependent on F agreeing to the additional and/or different terms.
When there is a different term within the offer and acceptance, the term will often become part of the contract if the offeror does not expressly object to it. Here, F did not expressly object to it. Therefore, it is possible that the term changed to California. However, some courts apply the "knock out" rule which states that when there are conflicting terms, both terms are stricken from the contract and the court will provide commercially reasonable gap filler.
Therefore, her acceptance was valid and the contract is enforceable.
?12

Duties
On June 29th B accepted delivery of 1050 pigs at $33.25 per pig. Acceptance under the UCC can also come in the form of acceptance of goods. If the court finds that their written agreements were not sufficient to indicate a mutual assent and meeting of the minds, F's delivery and B's acceptance of the pigs will operate as an acceptance.
Therefore, there is a contract and B's duty to pay has come fully due. Betty accepted and paid for the pigs.
Defenses
Statute of Frauds
Under the statute of frauds, an agreement for the sale of goods $500 or more must be in writing. This agreement is for the sale of pigs which cost over $500 therefore, the Statute of Frauds will apply.
Signed Writing
The statute of frauds will be satisfied if there is a writing containing sufficient terms signed by the party to be charged. Here F is claiming breach by B, therefore, for the contract to be valid there must be a signed writing by B. B signed F's "Pig Sales Agreement" and returned it on June 10. The agreement contained price, quantity, parties, subject matter and time of performance; therefore there is a signed writing. Further, On June 25 Betty initialed F's revised document including her changes as to additional and different terms, therefore there is another signed writing.
The statute of frauds defense will not apply.
Anticipatory Repudiation
Anticipatory Repudiation is an unequivocal expression of failure to perform.
?????13

B advised F that she would not accept any more pigs because they did not have a contract. This is an unequivocal expression of failure to perform and therefore is an anticipatory breach.
F may treat this as a present breach.
Betty will argue that they did not have a contract because they did not agree about the terms of the offer, specifically, the state within which disputes would be handled and the give or take 20. However, as discussed supra, these did not create fatal flaws to the contract. The parties agreed on quantity 1050 (give or take 20) and price of pigs (33.25 per pig) as well as a commercially reasonable price for feed. Therefore, their possible disagreement about the state will not relieve B's duties under the contract.
F will prevail in a breach of contract action against B.
Remedies
The non breaching party is required to cover his damages. F will be required to apply best efforts to find another buyer for the pigs and feed. B will be required to pay the difference in cost, or F's expectancy under the contract.
?14

Question 2
Al and his wife Bobbie owned a laundromat and lived in an apartment above it. They were having significant financial difficulties because the laundromat had been losing money.
Unbeknownst to Bobbie, Al decided to burn the laundromat down in order to obtain insurance proceeds. He contacted Ted, who had a reputation for being available to do "odd jobs." Ted agreed to set fire to the laundromat the next day for 20 percent of the insurance proceeds. Al told him that he would call him once everyone was out of the building.
The next day, Al invited Bobbie out for a walk. While she was getting ready, he checked the laundromat, found no one there, and called Ted. While Al and Bobbie were out walking, Bobbie mentioned that, just as she was leaving, her brother Brad had come by the apartment unexpectedly and was napping on their couch. Al rushed to call Ted. When he could not reach him, he made an anonymous call to 911 to report a possible fire at the laundromat.
In the meantime, Ted started a fire that quickly engulfed the laundromat and the apartment, and killed Brad. After learning of Brad's death, Al decided not to file a claim for insurance proceeds.
With what crimes, if any, could Al be charged and what defenses, if any, could he assert? Discuss.
15

Answer A to Question 2
With what crimes, if any, could Al be charged with and what defenses, if any, could he assert?
People vs. Al
Can Al be charged with insurance fraud?
Insurance Fraud is the intentional or purposeful damage of one's own property in order to obtain by deceit and with fraudulent intentions a recovery from one's insurance company. The facts indicated that Al's laundromat business had been losing money. The further state that Al decided to burn down his laundromat with the intentions of collecting "insurance proceeds". The facts do not indicate whether Al successfully recovered any 'insurance proceeds' or not, however, he had the requisite specific intent, or mens rea; he was not privileged to burn his home down purposefully in order to defraud his insurance company; he appeared to be involved in an insurance scam by way of soliciting (infra) Ted to a conspiracy (infra); and he in fact perpetrated the offense beyond mere preparation--that is, he solicited Ted and took an overt step in the furtherance of the plan by initially removing everyone from the target structure; Al will be justly charged with Attempt to Commit Insurance Fraud; The fact that he decided not to file a claim upon learning of Brad's death is irrelevant to an inchoate crime; however, it does evidence that Al never succeeded in committing Insurance Fraud;
Can Al be charged with Solicitation?
Solicitation is the encouragement or antagonization of a crime; The facts indicate that Al, in order to perpetrate his insurance fraud crime, contacted Ted to encourage him to burn his laundromat down in exchange for a percentage of the 'insurance proceeds'. Al will be justly charged with Soliciting Ted.
Merger law; The crime of solicitation will merge with the greater subsequent crime;
?????16

Can Al be charged with Conspiracy to Commit Arson?
A Conspiracy is the willful entering into an agreement with another person, with requisite intent on entering that agreement to commit a crime; and modernly an overt act in furtherance of the crime; As mentioned supra, Al contacted Ted to solicit him. He and Ted agreed to and devised a plan to burn down Al's laundromat in order to collect insurance proceeds; Al's step in furtherance of the plan (mentioned supra); Al will be justly charged with Conspiracy to Commit Arson.
Can Al be charged with Conspiracy to Commit Insurance Fraud?
Conspiracy (Supra). Elements of Conspiracy (supra); The facts indicate that Al entered into an agreement with Ted in order to defraud his insurance company. The agreement was intentional and an overt action in furtherance of the conspiracy was made (supra); Al will be charged with Conspiracy to Commit Insurance Fraud. The fact that he decided to abort his claim is irrelevant;
Can Al be charged with Conspiracy to Commit Murder?
Conspiracy (Supra); Elements of (Supra); The facts indicate that Al and Ted agreed to commit modern law arson; It is foreseeable that someone could be seriously injured or killed by the perpetration of such an act; The death of a innocent bystander is foreseeable in the furtherance of the Modern law Arson; Thus, if a court finds that the felony murder of Brad was in furtherance of the crime of modern law arson, Al may be charged with Conspiracy to Commit Murder;
Will Al be liable for the crimes of Ted?
Pinkerton's Rule establishes that all co-conspirators are responsible for the crimes of one another that are foreseeable in the furtherance of the intended and conspired-to crime; The facts indicate that Ted performed the actus reus of the setting fire to the laundromat; While Al was not an Accomplice to the crime because he was not at the crime scene, he will still be vicariously liable for Ted's offenses due to Pinkerton's law.
Was Al an Accessory before the fact?
?????17

An accessory before the fact is one who aids in the commission of a crime, however, is not necessarily at the crime scene concurrent with the actus reus. The facts indicate that Al phoned Ted to notify him that the laundromat was void of people. He helped Ted by giving him a cue; As such Al is an accessory before the fact to the crime.
Can Al be charged with Arson?
Arson at Common Law is the intentional burning of a dwelling of another; At Modern Law it is the intentional burning of the structure of another, not necessarily a dwelling; The facts indicate that Al had specific intent to burn down his laundromat. While his laundromat is not a dwelling per se, it is beneath an apartment which is a dwelling. Because of the juxtaposition of the two units, a court will likely find that the laundromat and the apartment are in fact the same structure; If so, Al will be justly charged with Common Law Arson. If the court finds that the laundromat and the overhead apartment were separate structures, Al will be charged with Modern Law Arson.
Can Al be charged with Murder?
Was there a homicide? Homicide is the killing of another person. The facts indicate that Brad was killed. Yes, a homicide occurred.
Murder is the killing of another person with Malice Aforethought.
Did Al (and Ted) have malice?
Malice Aforethought is the intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily harm, a wanton and willful disregard for human life, or intent to commit an inherently dangerous felony. The facts indicate that Al purposely arranged to burn his laundromat down to collect an insurance payout. Structure fires can prove very deadly and costly, often associated with numerous victims. Such an action is inherently dangerous and a wanton and willful disregard of human life, evidencing of a depraved heart. The court will find that Al (and Ted) did have malice aforethought.
Was Al (by way of Ted) the actual cause of Brad's Death?
????18

The actual cause or cause in fact can be established by the Substantial Factor Test; As mentioned supra, Al is responsible by way of Pinkertons Law for the acts of Ted in furtherance of their conspiracy; If Ted is the actual cause of Brad's death, Al vicariously will be deemed the same; The facts indicate that Ted intentionally set fire to the laundromat; "But For" Ted's setting fire to the laundromat, Brad wouldn't have been killed; Thus Ted is the Cause in fact of Brad's death;
Was Al (by way of Ted) the proximate cause of Brads Death?
The proximate cause is one that in the normal chain of reasonably foreseeable events would lead to the resulting crime; The facts indicate that Ted set fire to the laundromat; Although Al had informed Ted that the apartment was devoid of all life, it was still possible that while Al was away someone might have unbeknownst to him entered either the laundromat or the dwelling; Furthermore, its foreseeable that an inherently dangerous felony of modern law arson can easily and unintentionally cause casualties. Ted will likely be found to be the proximate cause of Brad's death. Thus, causation is affirmed, and Al will be vicariously liable for murder.
Al will be rightfully charged with Murder.
Will Al be charged at modern law with 1st Degree Murder or 2nd Degree Murder?
1st Degree Murder is a Premeditated and Deliberate Killing of Another Human Being With Malice Aforethought, by way of lying in wait, Poison, Torture, or during the commission of an inherently dangerous felony such as Arson. 2nd degree murder are all murders that aren't first degree murders. The facts indicate that Al solicited Ted to set fire to his laundromat as a ploy to make a fraudulent insurance claim; While Al lacked a specific intent to kill Brad with the fire, he never less was in the commission of the inherently dangerous felony of Modern Law Arson vicariously through Ted's actions; As such, A will be justly charged with 1st Degree Felony Murder.
??19

Defenses
Did Al withdraw from the conspiracy? Withdrawal from a conspiracy is modernly evidenced by a repudiation of the planned crime, and an intention attempt to stop or prevent the crime; An important distinction regarding withdrawal is purposeful intent; That is to say, merely withdrawing from the crime because its perpetration has become overwhelmingly difficult is not grounds for a proper withdrawal. The facts indicate that Al made a good faith effort to contact Ted, presumably to warn him about Brad. The facts are not abundantly clear what Al's intentions for contacting Ted were, but is it reasonable to conclude he aimed to warn Ted to abort because of Brads presence in the overhead dwelling; Since Al never made contact with Ted, this element to withdrawal was never met. The facts also indicate that Al dialed 911 in order to galvanize rescue services to the apartment impliedly to prevent Brad from burning to death. Al never confessed to conspiring to commit insurance fraud, nor did he make mention that Ted was in danger.
If a court finds that Al The facts indicate that Al's actions were a response to the crime being complicated by Brad's presence in the upstairs apartment, and NOT because he aimed to withdraw from the burning of the laundromat below, he may not have met this element properly of withdrawal. If a court finds that Al's attempt to phone 911 was because he had second thoughts about his insurance fraud conspiracy, and finds that his good faith attempt to contact Brad was to repudiate the conspiracy, a court may exonerate him of the crimes perpetrated in furtherance of the conspiracy, however more facts will need to surface at a trial. The facts given are not conclusive enough. As such, Al will most likely not prevail in his defense of withdrawal
NOTE: Al will still be justly charged with the conspiracy whether he withdrew or not. Withdrawal is NOT an affirmative defense to conspiracy.
?20

Can Al submit a Defense to 1st Degree Felony Murder, Modern Law Arson and Conspiracy to Commit Arson, and Conspiracy to Commit Insurance Fraud?
Defenses to Arson, Murder, If a jury decides that Al had withdrawn from the conspiracy, he may have a solid defense to refute Pinkertons rule and the vicarious liability associated with Ted; Al may have a rationale to defense himself against Ted's crimes, but as mentioned supra it's unlikely to prevail from the facts given.
Can Al assert a defense that he was not the proximate cause of Brad's death? Inadequate Causation. Al may argue that he made a reasonable inspection of the premises and removed his wife from their apartment prior to giving Ted the word to set the laundromat ablaze. Al will argue that such an action made it unreasonably foreseeable that Brad or any other visitor might remain in the dwelling; He will argue that Brad's decision to visit the dwelling is a intervening and superseding event, breaking the chain of causation to his untimely death; If a court of law believes Al, he may be able to escape a felony murder charge for inadequate causation; However, a court is likely to rule that Al's inspection was cursory and ineffective, and his wanton and willful disregard for human life predicated such foreseeable catastrophe and loss of life; Al will unlikely prevail in this defense.
??21

Al's Crimes
Answer B to Question 2
?SOLICITATION
Solicitation is the intentional asking of another to commit an unlawful act.
After Al decided he wanted to burn down the laundromat he contacted Ted, who is known for doing "odd jobs", to burn down his laundromat. The facts are clear that Al intentionally asked Ted to do any unlawful act (burning down a laundromat to collect insurance proceeds) and has committed the crime of solicitation.
MERGER
The crime of solicitation will merge with the crime of conspiracy.
As shown below, Al will be shown to have entered into a conspiracy. He will not be charged with solicitation, but conspiracy a stronger crime.
CONSPIRACY
Conspiracy is the intentional agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act. Many modern law jurisdictions require an overt step.
Ted agreed to set fire to the laundromat; thus, Al and Ted formed an agreement with intent to commit the unlawful act of burning down the laundromat. Ted actually committed the arson (overt step) and it will not merge with conspiracy. Al and Ted can be charged with conspiracy plus and crimes in furtherance (foreseeable).
PINKERTON RULE
The Pinkerton rule provides that coconspirators are guilty for the crimes of their coconspirators that are in furtherance of the intended unlawful act.
????22

Al and Ted are coconspirators and Al can be charged with any crimes committed by Ted in furtherance of the conspiracy. As shown below, Al can be charged with the murder.
WITHDRAWAL
To withdraw from a conspiracy one must notify the coconspirators of intent to withdraw before the unlawful act is committed. A reasonable person standard is used to determine if the withdrawal is effective. If withdrawal is effective, the person will still be charged with conspiracy, but not any acts in furtherance.
Here, Al has learned that his conspiracy will endanger his brother in law. He tries to withdraw the plan, but cannot reach his coconspirator. He attempts to save brother in law by calling 911, but the attempt is futile. Since Al was not able to communicate his intent to withdraw before Ted starts the fire he has not successfully withdrawn from the conspiracy.
ARSON
Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling house of another. Malicious can mean an intent to burn or established by reckless behavior. Burning means that the dwelling must be at least charred or burned, blackened or smoke damage will not suffice. Modernly, dwelling house has been removed and any structure of another will suffice.
Because Ted has started a fire that quickly engulfed the laundromat, it can be shown that Ted acted with the required intent to burn the structure of another.
ATTEMPTED INSURANCE FRAUD
Attempt is the specific intent to commit an unlawful crime, but due to a factual impossibility cannot occur. If the actor takes a substantial step in furtherance of the crime though he may have changed his mind, he will be charged with attempt of that crime.
???23

Insurance fraud is the misrepresentation of fact to collection on an insurance policy.
Al did not file an insurance claim for proceeds of his burned laundromat. However, he had the specific intent to commit the crime and set the plan in motion by entering a conspiracy that led to the burning of the building he intended to collect on. He will argue that he did not file a claim and thus a factual impossibility existed, but the substantial step was taken along with the intent and factual impossibility is not a defense to attempt. Al will be charged with attempted insurance fraud.
HOMICIDE
Homicide is the killing of one human being by another. There must be a causal connection between the killing and the person to be charged.
Here, Brad, Al's brother in law, has died because Ted set fire to Al's laundromat that was below the apartment that Al lived and Brad was visiting/napping. A homicide has occurred and is connected to Ted. As mentioned supra and will be shown below that Al can be charged because the killing occurred in furtherance of the intent to commit insurance fraud.
MURDER
Murder is the killing of a human being with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought can be established by one of four ways: intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily injury, wanton and willful misconduct and felony murder.
WANTON AND WILLFUL MISCONDUCT
Ted and Al did not have intent to harm anyone. Their plan was to be conducted when no one was home. Therefore, they will not be charged with intent to kill or intent to cause serious injury. However, because the homicide occurred due to the arson conspiracy of the laundromat and apartment that led to the killing, it can be demonstrated that Al and Ted acted with wanton and willful misconduct. The laundromat is a place of business that could have led to killing of customers who were
???24

visiting outside and an apartment could have been visited by a landlord, which shows that Al and Ted acted with a serious high risk of disregard to human life and could be prosecuted for wanton and willful misconduct.
FELONY MURDER
Felony murder is murder that occurs during the commission of an inherently dangerous crime such as arson.
Here, Brad died because of the arson. The defendants will argue that the arson was completed; however, the murder is collateral to the felony and will not avoid prosecution for felony murder.
VICARIOUS LIABILITY AS ACCOMPLICE
As stated supra, because Al is a coconspirator and even though not present at the crime scene he will be treated as an accomplice and charged with the murder of Brad that was in furtherance on the conspiracy.
FIRST DEGREE MURDER
First degree murder is established by intent to kill by premeditation and deliberation or felony murder.
If the prosecution achieves a conviction beyond a reasonable doubt for felony murder, than Al will be charged with first degree murder.
SECOND DEGREE MURDER
Second degree murder is default murder.
If Al is convicted of wanton and willful misconduct that he will be charged with second degree murder.
????25

MITIGATION TO MANSLAUGHTER
Murder can be mitigated to manslaughter if it can be shown that one acted in a heat of passion or had an imperfect defense (a mistake that was unreasonable but in good faith), known as voluntary manslaughter or involuntary manslaughter (misdemeanor- manslaughter or criminal negligence).
Al did not demonstrate anything to lessen his chances of receiving first or second degree murder. See below for further defense arguments by Al.
JUSTIFICATION
Crime Prevention
Al may try to argue that he called 911 and to avoid a crime of murder, but this is not applicable. Crime prevention by citizen involves responding in the to apprehend a felon. He was only trying to provide a rescue by firefighter or paramedic of his brother since he only reported a fire at the laundromat. Al will not succeed in justification and has no other justifications such as self-defense, defense of others or a reasonable good-faith mistake. Al cannot argue insanity, intoxication or youth. Al may try to argue duress since he was having financial difficulties, but duress will not be applicable since he is not trying to substantial save others. Therefore, Al has no further defenses and can be charged with all of the crimes mentioned above.
??26

Question 3
Dana decided to purchase new carpet for her home from Larry. Before signing a contract, Larry carefully evaluated Dana's home, including the subfloor, and concluded that it would take approximately 10 hours over two days to complete the job.
Dana entered into a written contract with Larry providing that she would pay him $2,500 for the carpeting project, including the removal and disposal of the old carpet, any necessary repairs to the subfloor, and installation of the new carpet.
When Larry ordered Dana's carpet, he discovered that the manufacturer's price had significantly increased. Later, when he began to remove her old carpet, he discovered that the subfloor was in far worse condition than he had expected. He then realized that the job would take at least 15 hours to complete.
As Larry worked, Dana expressed concern that he would not complete the job in time for an important dinner party she had planned for the following night. She pressed him to complete the job as soon as possible. He responded: "I'm going to lose at least $500 on this job. Your carpet cost me a lot more than expected, and the installation is taking forever. If you really want me to complete this job by tomorrow, you should consider paying what the job is actually worth."
Shocked by what Larry said, Dana feared that he might walk off the job. Believing she had no alternative, she immediately agreed to pay an additional $500. Larry worked later than usual that afternoon, and he completed the job in time for Dana's dinner party.
Dana is fully satisfied with the job, but has refused to pay Larry more than $2,500.
Larry has sued Dana for breach of contract.
What arguments can Larry reasonably make to show that Dana has breached the contract, what arguments can Dana reasonably make to show that she has not, and who is likely to prevail? Discuss.
27

Larry v Dana, Dana v Larry
Answer A to Question 3
?Common law. The UCC governs the law pertaining to the sale of goods. All other contracts are governed by the common law such as personal services contracts. Where there is a mix of a services contract and sale of goods, whatever predominates will be effectual.
Here, Dana is both purchasing the carpet from Larry and he is also providing the service of installing it. It is not evident which one prevails since we do not know the dollar value of the installation vs. the supply of the carpet. For instance if the carpet cost $2000 and the install was $500 then we could consider this a UCC contract and vice-versa. Therefore, we can look at it from both points of view, that is the UCC and the Common Law.
Merchants. A merchant is a party who deals regularly with goods in question of holds himself out to have particular skill regarding the good. Here, Larry is both dealing with carpets and also installing carpets and is thus considered a merchant. Dana on the other hand is homeowner and is not a merchant.
Contract. A contract is defined as an agreement for which the law recognizes a breach and provides a remedy in the event of a breach. There must be valid offer, acceptance and legal consideration and no defenses.
Here, the facts tell us that they signed an agreement and therefore we can assume that there is a contract.
UCC. Under the UCC only a quantity term was needed. Therefore, if we are so assume that this is a UCC contract, the quantity of the one carpet.
28

Common law. Under the common law there is a requirement of definite terms.
quantity - 1 carpet
price - $2,500
identity of the parties - Larry and Dana Time of performance - ?
Subject matter - carpet for home
Here we see that there is no time of performance. However, the courts can imply a reasonable term and this would not necessarily preclude that there is a contract.
Therefore, in additional to there being a signed contract and with the necessary terms for both UCC and Common law it is evident that there is a binding contract.
UCC. Modification of contract. Under UCC2-209 a contract can be modified for the sale of goods even when there is no valid consideration as there is an implied condition of good faith and fair dealing.
Therefore, Larry will argue under the UCC that he has made valid change to the contract. He will argue that Dana agreed to the change in the contract by saying agreed to pay the extra $500.
Common law. Under the Common law, pre-existing duty rule (Alaskan Fish Packer case) there can be no change to a contract unless there valuable consideration. A valid exception to this would be a good faith dispute.
Dana will argue that under the common law, there was no change in what she was to receive. She still received the carpet installed as per the contract. Larry on the other hand will show that there was a change for the undiscovered floor condition. It is noted that where a contractor finds previously undiscovered conditions he may attempt to get consideration for dealing with the problem. Dana, on the other hand, will argue that
29

Larry carefully evaluated here home including the subfloor and included in his price any necessary repairs to the subfloor.
Further, Larry will attempt to introduce evidence that there was no time is of the essence clause of the contract. Under the common law there is a reasonable time given to the performance of a contract and a party can still be found to have substantially performed even if he goes beyond the time unless there is a time is of the essence clause (unless there is an implied material condition that time is of the essence when the party enters knowing that the benefit is based on the performance being completed at a certain time and here there is no evidence that Larry knows at contract formation anything about the dinner party and that the contract needed to be complete in time for it).
Here, Larry will attempt to prove that somehow the consideration he gave was to finish the job faster as Dana now made time as being of the essence because she wanted the carpet installed. Dana will counter that although she made pressed him to finish in time for the dinner party she did not specifically change the contract to being time is of the essence.
Statute of Frauds. Under the UCC contract of $500 or more must be signed and be in writing to be valid. Further, modifications must be in writing where they exceed $500.
Here, the modification was in writing and therefore, Dana will argue that agreed orally to the modification and since it was not in writing it is not enforceable.
Under the common law, as a services contract, the modification need not be in writing. Defenses.
Defense of Larry. Financial impractability. Where there was an unforeseen circumstance between contract formation and performance of the duty which would make the contract so burdensome so as to be financially impracticable the courts may
30

discharge the contract. However, the courts will rarely grant where there is a great added expense due to market conditions.
Nevertheless, Larry could argue that the manufacturer's price significantly increased between formation of the contract and his performance. Dana on the other hand will argue that this is a risk of doing business and she will likely prevail since as mentioned the courts have rarely discharged a contract for added expense.
Further, since Larry has already performed and is seeking a remedy, discharge is just not in his interest and so he would not pursue this remedy at law.
Defense of Dana. Duress. Duress may be either personal or economic. Where personal there is some threat to the defendant or her family. Economic duress will only prevail where the defendant shows they were 1. under a pressing need 2. the plaintiff aggravated the situation.
Here, this defense seems unlikely as there is no evidence that Larry actually created the situation although Dana will argue that she really needed to have it done by the dinner party as it was important and that he took advantage of that situation. Again, this is a question for the trier of facts to decide on.
Unconscionability. Where the term is so oppressive as to shock the conscious. This may be procedural (legalize ect.) or substantial (an oppressive term).
Dana will argue she was shocked by what Larry said and therefore, it is unconscionable.
Breach. Common Law. Where there is substantial compliance there cannot be a major breach of contract. Since Larry completed the contract he will have a claim to the contract price plus any incidentals.
31

Remedies.
Expectation damages. This puts the parties in the position of the contract being completed.
Dana will argue that the original contract price was $2,500 and she got what she bargained for with no additions and so does not have to pay an additional $500.
Larry will argue that the modification was valid and therefore, he is entitled to the extra $500.
?32

Answer B to Question 3
I. What law governs the contract?
The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) governs all contracts pertaining to goods which are movable tangible items at the time for identification to the contract. All other contracts are governed by the common law. Here, there is a contract for services regarding the installation of carpet into "Dana's home." Therefore the common law will apply.
Predominate Factor Test- The predominate factor test is used by courts to distinguish whether a contract is goods or services based. Here, "Dana decided to purchase new carpet for her home from Larry. Carpeting is a good since it is movable and tangible. However, Larry was to "carefully" evaluate and inspect "Dana's home" and he was to install the contract. Therefore this is most likely a services based contract because although Dana is purchasing carpet from Larry she has also agreed to pay him "$2,500 for the carpeting project" which does include the services of inspection, installation, "removal" of her old carpet accompanied with "any necessary repairs to the subfloor." Therefore this is predominately a services based contract since Larry is "carefully" evaluating "Dana's home" which seems to bear a greater burden upon him than simply selling her a carpet. The common law will apply and this is a services based contract.
II. Is there a valid contract?
A contract is a promise or set of promises for breach of which the law provides a remedy or in some way recognizes a duty to perform. A valid contract must have an offer, acceptance, and consideration with no defenses to formation.
Offer- A valid offer must have a present intent to contract with terms being certain and definite communicated to an offeree. This creates the power of acceptance. Here, the evidence indicates that Larry and Dana "entered into a written contract" therefore it is
??33

presumed that there was a present intent to contract because the two parties "entered into a written contract." The terms are certain and definite because the cost of the "carpeting project" is "$2,500" which includes "installation of the new carpet," inspection of the old carpet accompanied with its "removal" and for him to make "any necessary repairs to the subfloor." This contract was communicated to an offeree based upon the evidence of the fact that there was a "written contract" executed between the parties.
Acceptance
A valid acceptance must have an unequivocal manifestation of assent to the terms of the offer in a manner requested by it or done in a reasonable manner under the circumstances. Here, the evidence indicates that the parties entered into a "written contract" therefore there was a valid acceptance.
Consideration
Consideration is the bargained[-]for exchange of legal benefits and detriments between the parties involved. Here, Larry suffers the detriment of having to install the contract and perform the myriad of services delineated supra while gaining the economical benefit of "$2,500" payment for providing the carpet and services. Dana suffers the detriment of having to part ways with "$2,500" while gaining the benefit the new carpet and services. Valid consideration was consummated between the parties.
Pre-Existing Duty Rule- The pre-existing duty rule is applicable where a contractual party is already legally obligated and contractually bound to perform the duties of the contract. Here, after Larry discovered that the contract was going to take "at least 15 hours to complete" instead of "10 hours" as originally estimated by him, Larry demanded an additional "$500" from Dana to complete the services he was already contractually bound to complete. Due to the pre-existing duty rule Dana will probably not be obligated to pay this amount of money because Larry was already contractually bound to perform the services and he garnished no new consideration to Dana in spite
??34

of her agreeing to pay it. However, Larry will argue that he did furnish requisite new consideration because his original duties upon the job were varied by his request for "$500" from Dana, because she "expressed concern that he would not complete the job in time for an important dinner party she had planned for the following night," she "pressed him to complete the job as soon as possible" and he "worked later than usual that afternoon" in order to complete it. Larry will claim that when he performed this and the job was done "in time for Dana's dinner party" that this furnished new consideration. However, his argument may fail as he might have already been under a duty to complete the job before her party.
III. Are there any defenses to formation?
Statute of Frauds (SOF)
The SOF mandates that certain contracts be evidenced in writing whereby the parties are identified signed by the party to be charged with essential terms. The SOF mandates that contracts which cannot be performed within a year must be in writing. Here, this contract is for services which are to be completed relatively quickly for Dana's "party." Therefore it can be completed in a year and this contract is enforceable regardless of the fact that it is in writing. Neither party will be able to assert it as a defense as there was a "written contract" consummated between the parties, thus the parties were identified and presumably signed by both. The terms were certain because it involved the sale of a carpet from Larry to Dana, its installation by Larry, the removal of the old carpet by Larry and was also to repair the "subfloor." Neither party can assert this defense and Larry can enforce the contract against Dana because she has "refused to pay" him.
Duress
Contractual duress is when a contracting party knows that the other party has no reasonable alternatives to fulfill the contract performance and in consideration of this
???35

knowledge the party inflicting duress upon the other takes advantage of this position to their economical benefit. Here, Dana will claim that Larry used contractual duress upon her to get her to agree to the additional "$500" payment because he knew that she needed the job done before her "party" was to begin. Larry will argue that the contract modification was done in good faith as his duties were varied by as discussed supra. This may be an affirmative defense for Dana.
IV. Are there any performance issues?
Impossibility
Impossibility of performance is when an unforeseen event in which its non-occurrence was a basic assumption of the contract that renders performance objectively impossible, meaning that no one would be able to perform it. Here, Larry will assert impossibility of performance because he "discovered that the manufacturer's price had significantly increased" and that he "discovered that the subfloor was in far worse condition than he had expected." This defense will fail because part of the contract was for Larry to "carefully" evaluate the subfloor, and the fact that the "subfloor" was in worse condition that he expected would fall under part of the inherent risk that he assumed when he entered the contract. Further, mere increase in cost to a contractor is also within the purview of a risk which he assumed when he entered the contract. This defense will fail.
Impracticability
A contracting party's performance is excused when he endures severe hardship from an unforeseeable event which renders performance highly commercially impracticable. For the same reasons as asserted above, Larry will claim that the increase in costs and the worse condition of Dana's "subfloor" rendered the performance of the contract commercially impracticable. However, this defense will fail as he most likely assumed the risks of these burdens.
???36

Frustration
Frustration of purpose is when an unforeseeable, supervening event renders performance of the contract pointless. Here, Larry will argue that when the cost of the carpet increased along with Dana's "subfloor" being in a worse condition that this frustrated the purpose of his contract to be pointless because he stood "to lose at least $500 on the job" for her. However, this defense will fail because these events were not unforeseeable and he most likely assumed the risk of them occurring when he entered into the contract with Dana.
Substantial Performance
Substantial performance is when a contracting party fully performs but for a minor defect. Here, the evidence indicates that Larry completed performance in order for Dana to have her party. He was also not paid. Therefore Larry has substantially performed.
Modification
A contract modification is when multiple parties agree to vary the performance of duties between both parties under a contract which has already been consummated. Services based contracts which are governed by the common law, such as here, require additional consideration for a contract modification. Larry will argue that after he learned of the difficulties of the price increase of the carpet and learned the true deleterious condition of Dana's "subfloor" that he consummated a valid contract modification with her as his duties were varied as discussed supra.
V. Is there a breach? Material Breach
?????37

A material breach occurs when a contracting party fails to receive the substantial benefit which she bargained for. Here, Larry will claim there was a substantial breach because he was not paid and did not receive the substantial benefit which he bargained for.
VI. Are there any damages and remedies?
Restitution/ Quasi Contract
Restitution in quasi contract seeks to avoid the unjust enrichment of the defendant from the benefit which was conferred upon her by the plaintiff. Here, Larry will recover the reasonable value of the services which he performed for Dana.
Expectation Damages
Expectation damages seek to place
???38

Question 4
One evening, a singer was performing at a local restaurant that was packed with customers. While he was performing, a fire broke out in the restaurant's kitchen and caused smoke to fill the premises. Seeing the smoke, he screamed, "Fire!" The customers panicked and rushed toward the exits.
Polly, a blind woman who was sitting at a table near the stage, tried to find an exit but mistakenly walked into the kitchen, where she inhaled thick smoke and was burned by flames. Eventually, she found her way outside and collapsed face-down on the sidewalk.
A passerby noticed Polly. Concerned that she might not be breathing, he turned her over and prepared to administer CPR. As it happened, she did not require CPR. But by turning her over, he worsened her injuries.
An investigation showed that the fire began in one of the restaurant's ovens. The oven's ventilation system had failed to work properly because grease had built up in a pipe and blocked the airflow. A statute provides that restaurants "shall equip ovens with ventilation systems and shall maintain such systems in working order at all times," and makes violation punishable by a fine of $250 per day.
1. What claims, if any, can Polly reasonably bring against the singer, what defenses, if any, can he reasonably assert, and who is likely to prevail? Discuss.
2. What claims, if any, can Polly reasonably bring against the restaurant, what defenses, if any, can it reasonably assert, and who is likely to prevail? Discuss.
3. What claims, if any, can Polly reasonably bring against the passerby, what defenses, if any, can he reasonably assert, and who is likely to prevail? Discuss.
39

Polly v. Singer
Answer A to Question 4
?Since there would be no basis for any intentional torts, Polly would need to sue Singer based on Negligence.
Negligence: Polly must show that Singer owed her a duty, he breached that duty and caused her damages.
Duty: When one acts affirmatively, he owes a duty to anyone foreseeably injured by his actions. Here, Singer, upon seeing smoke, screamed "Fire". This was an affirmative action and since Polly was near the stage and could be foreseeably injured, he owed her a duty of reasonable care.
Breach. To prove breach, it needs to be shown that Singer acted unreasonably. A good measurement of unreasonableness is the Learned Hand test. This will weigh the magnitude and likelihood of the potential harm against the burden of avoidance plus the social utility. Here, by screaming the word fire in a packed restaurant it can be said that he acted unreasonably. The word caused panic and rushing of the customers. The potential harm of this could be that people get pushed or stomped or worse and in a packed restaurant that could be said to be quite likely. To avoid this, and since the smoke was the only thing in the dining area, the singer could easily have instead advised people calmly to exit the restaurant and could have avoided the panic. Therefore, Singer acted unreasonably.
Causation. Polly must also proved that Singer was both the cause in fact and the proximate cause of her injuries.
Cause-in-fact. Something is the cause in fact when "but-for" that conduct the injury would not have occurred or that the conduct was a substantial factor. Here, Polly
40

was a blind woman who walked into the kitchen. It cannot be said that but for Singer yelling "fire" that she would have not walked in the kitchen and been injured in the fire. The only argument would be that his causing of the panic was a substantial factor to her injuries in that she may have been able to find the front door had the panic not occurred. But this would be difficult to prove.
Proximate cause: If Singer was found to be the cause-in-fact, then he also be the proximate cause since there were no superseding and intervening events.
Damages. If Singer was found to be the cause, he would be liable for all the injuries she suffered as a result including the smoke inhalation and burns.
Defenses
Contributory Negligence. Singer would argue that Polly was contributorily negligent. Contributory negligence will be a complete bar to recovery. Singer would argue that both the fact that Polly was without someone to help her see and the fact that she mistakenly walked into the kitchen were negligent. Polly's negligence would be measured based on a reasonable blind person, that has been blind as long as Polly, and under these circumstances. If her actions were negligent, Polly would be barred from recovery even if Singer was negligent.
Comparative Fault. In some jurisdictions, Polly's negligence would simply lower the amount she is able to recover. In a pure comparative fault jurisdiction, she would be limited to the exact percentage she is not at fault. In a modified comparative fault jurisdiction, there would be a complete bar if her negligence was greater than a set percentage.
Therefore, Singer would most likely be able to prevail both because his actions would not be considered the cause in fact and even if there were, he could reasonably raise the contributory negligence defense and prevail.
?41

Polly v. Restaurant
Vicarious Liability. If Singer is found to be negligent and Singer is an employee of restaurant, then Restaurant could be found vicariously liable under Respondeat Superior for Singer's negligence. Here it is unclear if Singer is an employee or if he was subcontracted for this show. If he is a subcontractor, Restaurant would not be liable for his negligence.
Negligence: Even if there is no vicarious liability, Polly would have a direct cause of action against Restaurant for negligence.
Duty. Here, Polly would use negligence per se to establish a duty for Restaurant. The violation of a statute will set the duty and standard of care in a negligence case when the statute was designed to prevent the type of harm that has occurred, the plaintiff is in the class of plaintiffs being protected, and the violation is not excused. Here, the statute states that the restaurant must equip ovens with ventilation systems and maintain the systems in working order at all times. This statute is clearly meant to protect against the harm of smoke by requiring the system and against fire by requiring them to be maintained in working order. Any employee and restaurant goer would be in the protected class, and therefore Polly is in the protected class. And since the violation is not excused, the statute will set the standard of care.
Breach. Under negligence per se, violation of the statute will constitute breach. Here, the ventilation system had grease built up in the pipe which blocked airflow. Clearly, they are in violation of the statute since the system is not in working order. Therefore, they breached their duty.
Causation. It must also be shown that the breach of the duty was the cause of the injuries.
?42

Cause-in-fact. The facts state that the fire originated in one of the ovens because the ventilation system had grease buildup which blocked the airflow. Had the system been properly maintained, the fire would not have happened, and Polly would not have been injured.
Proximate Cause. Restaurant will argue that Passerby flipping her over was an intervening cause that would relieve them of liability. However, since it was restaurants negligence that brought about the need for passerby to attempt to rescue Polly, this would be a foreseeable result of the fire and would not cut off liability. Therefore, Restaurant is both the cause-in-fact and the proximate cause of Polly's injuries.
Damages. Restaurant would be liable for damages that resulted from the fire. This would include the worsened injury caused by Passerby since negligence invites rescue and it was foreseeable that this would occur.
Defenses. Restaurant would also raise the defenses of contributory negligence and comparative fault. It is unlikely that they will prevail since it can be easily argued that Polly acted as reasonable blind person since all blind folks do not bring people with them everywhere and she was acting in an emergency situation.
Therefore, it is likely that Polly will prevail in a negligence suit against Restaurant. Polly v. Passerby
Negligence. Polly may also attempt to sue Passerby for her worsened injuries.
Duty. Here, although Passerby had no duty to come to the rescue of Polly, but by undertaking to rescue her and leaving her in a worse off position, he did owe a duty of reasonable care.
Good Samaritan Laws: If this jurisdiction has a good Samaritan law, it would immediately relieve Passerby of any liability.
?43

Breach. Even though he did have a duty, it needs to be established that Passerby acted unreasonable. Here, all he did was flip Polly over to assure that she was breathing. He was also acting in an emergency situation. It would need to be shown that a reasonable person under the same emergency situation would have acted differently and not flipped her over to inspect. Polly was face-down on a sidewalk and Passerby was going to administer CPR, these actions were quite reasonable under the situation. Therefore, it is unlikely that Passerby had breached his duty.
Causation. If it is found that he did breach his duty, then he would also be the cause since the actions of him flipping her where the but-for cause of her worsened injuries and there were no intervening events.
Damages. If found liable for some reason, he would only be liable to the extent of the extra harm caused by flipping Polly over.
In this case, it is likely that Passerby would prevail a suit for negligence since he did not breach his duty of reasonableness.
Battery. Polly could also attempt to bring a claim of battery against Passerby. Battery is a intentional and voluntary conduct that causes a harmful or offensive touching to the plaintiff. Here, clearly Passerby did intentionally touch Polly. The action did harm Polly since it worsened her injuries. However, this was the kind of touching that would normally not have harmed anyone at all. The thin-skull doctrine, which states you take the plaintiff as you find her would not apply since that requires some type of harm to be likely. Here, a normal person would not have been harmed at all, so the extent of injury being worse is invalid. In addition, there can be implied consent because he was coming to her aid. Therefore, it is unlikely that Polly could prevail under Battery.
44

Answer B to Question 4
I. Polly v. Singer. Polly will bring an action in negligence against Singer. A negligence claim requires that five elements be met - (1) Duty; (2) Breach of Duty; (3) Actual Cause; (4) Proximate Cause; and (5) Damages.
A. Duty. When a defendant affirmatively acts, he owes a duty of reasonable care to any foreseeable plaintiffs. Here, Singer yelled "Fire." This was an affirmative act, and since Polly was in the restaurant, she was a foreseeable plaintiff. Singer owes a duty of reasonable care to Polly.
B. Breach of Duty. A breach of duty can be found to exist by employing the Learned Hand Calculus (LHC). The LHC (B<PL) states that if the probability of harm multiplied by the magnitude of the harm, outweighs the burden to make the act safer or the social value/utility of the act, then the defendant will have breached his duty of care. Here, it's going to be very difficult to find that Singer breached his duty of care to Polly. Singer saw a fire and reacted the way that most people would have reacted. He was afraid of burning to death, and he did not want to die or anyone else for that matter. However, if the court feels that he was negligent by yelling fire, which causes most people to panic (probability) and that this would cause most people to abandon the restaurant, preventing Polly from receiving help (magnitude), and that he should have pulled a fire alarm or notified the manager or called 911, then Singer will be found to have breached his duty of care to Polly.
C. Actual Cause. Actual cause exists if the defendant's acts are the but-for cause of the plaintiff's injury. Here, but for Singer yelling "Fire," the restaurant patrons would not have become scared and would not have rushed toward the exits.
D. Proximate Cause. Proximate cause exists if the plaintiffs injuries are a foreseeable consequence of the negligent act, and there are no intervening, superseding events that take place between the negligent act and the harm suffered by
?45

the plaintiff. Here, this will be another analysis that a court could use to determine that Singer was not liable for Polly's injuries. Even if Singer was negligent in yelling "Fire," Polly's injuries may be seen as unforeseeable, due to the fact that a blind person shouldn't be going to a crowded restaurant (presumably by herself) where things like this could happen. However, it is foreseeable that a person who can't see may end up walking into the wrong location and may suffer injuries as a result. If the court finds that the negligent act (yelling "Fire") is foreseeable capable of causing someone to get burned and suffer smoke inhalation, then this element may be satisfied. And because danger/negligence invites rescue, Polly could recover for the injuries she suffered from passerby as well, as long as it was foreseeable, which Good Samaritan assistance would be.
E. Damages. Damages are easy to satisfy. Polly suffered injuries - burns, smoke inhalation and the worsening of her injuries from Polly.
F. Defenses. Singer will try and claim that Polly was contributorily negligent or comparatively negligent. Most jurisdictions have eradicated contributory negligence as a means of mitigating the defendant's responsibility. Contributory negligence would be a complete bar to the plaintiff's recovery.
1. Comparative Negligence. Comparative negligence exists when the plaintiff does conduct him or herself in a way that protects her from harm, and this negligence legally contributed to bring about the plaintiff's harm. Therefore, Singer will claim that Polly was comparatively negligent by coming into the restaurant as a blind person, in the first place, and that she was negligent by walking into the kitchen, which will be harder to satisfy by the fact that she was blind. Comparative negligence allows for the plaintiff's recovery to be reduced by a certain percentage, based on the percentage of harm that the plaintiff contributed. In a pure comparative fault jurisdiction, even if Polly was 99% at fault she could still recover for 1% of her injuries. In a modified comparative negligence jurisdiction, if Polly's harm was below 49%, she could recover.
46

Other jurisdictions would also allow Polly to recover for her damages as long as her fault didn't surpass 50%.
Conclusion
Due to the fact that yelling fire is not a negligent act when you have a reasonable fear for your own safety, Singer was not negligent because he didn't breach his duty of care to Polly. Polly will not recover damages from Singer.
II. Polly v. Restaurant. (See negligence above)
A. Duty. (see above). Here, because Polly was an invitee and Restaurant was the landowner/occupier, Restaurant owed Polly a duty of reasonable care to inspect, discover and remedy any defects (dangerous conditions) that existed on its property. Restaurant held the restaurant open and probably charged Polly an admission fee to hear Singer perform, therefore Polly would be a business invitee. Restaurant acted affirmatively and Polly was a foreseeable plaintiff, since she was a customer of the restaurant.
B. Breach of Duty. (see above). Here, Restaurant breached its duty of care to Polly. By employing the Learned Hand Calculus, the probability of a blind person being injured in a fire, magnified by the fact that fire and smoke inhalation are very dangerous, because they can lead to serious injury or death, and the fact that the burden to make the kitchen safer for its invitees, by not properly inspected the kitchen's ventilation system, which is not burdensome, Restaurant has breached its duty of care to Polly.
1. Negligence per se. Negligence per se exists when the defendant violates a statute, ordinance or regulation that was used as the duty of care. Three things must be proven:
a. The plaintiff was in the class that the statute was designed to protect. Here, Polly was a customer of the restaurant. She was definitely the type of
??47

plaintiff the statute was designed to protect, especially since she got injured on Restaurant's premises.
b. The type of injury suffered by the plaintiff is the type of injury that the statute was designed to protect against. Here, Polly suffered smoke inhalation and burns to her skin. Since proper maintenance of a ventilation system for the oven would have probably prevented this injury, and fire resulted due to Restaurant's negligence in not maintaing the safety of the oven, Polly suffered the kind of injuries that the statute was designed to prevent against.
c. Excuse. There are no facts available that show that Restaurant was or should have been excused to not properly maintain their oven's ventilation system. A court will find that under negligence per se, Restaurant breached their duty of care to Polly.
C. Actual Cause (see above). Here, but for Restaurant's failure to properly maintain the ventilation system and do inspect, discover and remedy dangerous conditions on their property, Polly would not have suffered harm.
D. Proximate Cause. (see above). Here, Restaurant may try and claim that Polly's blindness and Singer's yelling "Fire" were intervening, superseding forces that should break the chain of causation/events for Restaurant's negligence. There are several people that are blind, and they do go to restaurants, and yelling "Fire," is a very common and foreseeable consequence of witness smoke and fire in a crowded place. Danger invites rescue, and Passerby's actions would most likely be seen as foreseeable as well. Therefore, Restaurant will be the proximate cause of Polly's injuries.
E. Damages. Polly suffered smoke inhalation and burn damage. She has suffered harm.
48

F. Defenses. (contributory and comparative negligence - see above). As previously discussed in proximate cause for Polly v. Restaurant, Restaurant cannot claim her blindness, Singer's yelling of "Fire," or Passerby's actions as unforeseeable, therefore these defenses will not alleviate or discard the negligence of Restaurant.
Conclusion.
Restaurant will be liable for Polly's injuries.
III. Polly v. Passerby. (see negligence definition and elements above).
A. Duty. (see above). No one owes another a duty of care to rescue someone, like Polly, absent a special relationship, creation of peril or an undertainking. However, Passerby did commit to an undertaking, therefore he may have started out as not owing a duty of care to Polly, once he committed to an undertaking (to perform CPR), he now created a duty of reasonable care, and since Polly was in the zone of danger (proximity to him and the burning restaurant), Polly is a foreseeable plaintiff.
B. Breach of Duty. (see definition above). Here, the probability and magnitude of harm probably would be outweighed by the social utility and value of passerby's conduct (attempting to perform CPR). Because danger invites rescue, Passerby acted reasonably by trying to help a blind person breathe and prevent her death. Therefore, he will most likely not be found to have breached his duty. However, if the court feels that he acted unreasonably by trying to perform CPR, and this worsened her previous injuries, then Passerby may be found to have breached his duty.
1. Emergency Doctrine. Also, Passerby's actions will also be viewed through the scope of what a reasonable person under the circumstances that Passerby found himself in. This could help to prove that Passerby acted reasonably.
C. Actual Cause. (see above). Here, but for attempting to perform CPR and turning her over, Polly would not have suffered additional harm. Therefore, Passerby is the but for cause of her injuries.
??49

D. Proximate Cause. (see above). Here, the fire that broke out which caused her original injuries, which intervened between his act and Polly's injuries are not unforeseeable. Restaurants sometimes catch fire. People yell "Fire" when fires break out, therefore, Passerby cannot use Singer's actions to cut of foreseeability, and it's probable that a Restaurant may not perform its landowner duties properly, therefore, Passersby may be held liable for worsening Polly's injuries.
E. Damages. Polly suffered damages when they were worsened by Passerby's activities.
F. Defenses. The best defense for Passerby would be the Good Samaritan Doctrine (GSD). If the jurisdiction where the fire and resulting injuries took place has a GSD on the books, as long as Passerby was not reckless or wanton in his response to assist Polly, then he will be relieved from liability for Polly's injuries.
2. Contributory/Comparative Negligence (see above). Passerby could claim the same defenses that were used by the other defendants in Polly's previous lawsuits against Singer and Restaurant.
Conclusion. Passerby, because he was not reckless or wanton in coming to Polly's aid or in the manner in which he attempted to assist her, he will not owe Polly any damages for negligence.
50


??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2012
1
California First-Year Law Students' Examination

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2012 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2012 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page 3.
??Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject Page Contracts 4
Criminal Law 19 Torts 47 Criminal Law 61
???2

June 26, 2012
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all four (4) questions. Time allotted: 4 hours
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?3

Question 1
Chip, Inc. ("Chip") manufactures computers. It uses a certain part-Part X-that can be manufactured by several companies, including Company A and Company B. It currently needs 1,000 units of the part. Company A, which had previously supplied the part, informed Chip that it was unable to do so.
On July 1, Chip sent a letter to the other manufacturers, including Company B, stating:
We are sending this order to several manufacturers. We will buy from the first manufacturer to commit itself to provide 1,000 units of Part X at $20 each by July 31 on the terms specified in this order, provided the commitment is made to us by July 8. We are aware that, because of the nature of the part, we cannot expect you to warrant it against manufacturing defects.
On July 3, Company A told Chip that it might be able to supply 1,000 units of Part X after all. Since Company A was Chip's preferred manufacturer, Chip sent a letter on July 4 to the other manufacturers stating: "We may be in a position to obtain 1,000 units of Part X elsewhere. Please disregard the letter we sent on July 1."
On July 7, Company B delivered a letter to Chip stating: "We accept your offer and will supply you with 1,000 units of Part X by July 31 on the terms specified herein. We warrant the part against manufacturing defects."
1. Does Company B have a contract with Chip to supply 1,000 units of Part X? Discuss.
2. Assuming that Company B does have a contract with Chip to supply 1,000 units of Part X, does the contract contain a warranty against manufacturing defects? Discuss.
4

ANSWER A TO QUESTION 1
As set forth below, (1) Company B has a contract with Chip to supply 1,000 units of Part X because Chip's revocation was ineffective. (2) The contract between Company B and Chip contains a warranty against manufacturing defects.
Applicable Law
Contracts involving the sale of goods are governed by the UCC. Goods are moveable tangible objects.
Here, the item involved in the contractual scenario is a part for a computer. This is moveable and tangible because it is being shipped and is being placed into the computer that Chip produces. If it could not be shipped or placed into the computer, it would not be moveable or tangible.
As such, these transactions involve a good, and are therefore governed UCC principles. Special rules apply to transaction between merchants. Merchants are those who regularly deal with the good at issue, or hold themselves out to have special knowledge of the good at issue.
Here, Chip manufactures computers and uses the part X involved here. Company A and B manufacture the chip. Therefore, Chip and Companies A & B are merchants. As such, special merchant rules will apply to these contractual situations.
(1) COMPANY B v. CHIP
CONTRACT FORMATION
A contract requires offer, acceptance, consideration, and no valid defenses.
??5

Offer
An offer requires (a) an outward manifestation of present contractual intent, (b) with definite and certain terms, (c) communicated to an identifiable offeree.
July 1
Here, re (a), Chip sent a letter to manufacturers including Company B stating that they will buy 1,000 units of Part X at $20 each from the first manufacturer to commit themselves by July 8 to delivering the part by July 31. This letter is a communication that was sent out, so it is an outward manifestation. Further, Chip said that they "will" buy the parts from the first manufacturer to commit to the performing according to the terms. "Will" is not equivocal language, it shows that Chip is serious about entering a contract with the first to commit to the terms. Further, Chip's statement of the specific terms shows that it is giving the recipients the power to accept because they know what will be expected of them - this is not an invitation to negotiate, but an offer to contract. As such, this element is met.
Here, re (b), the UCC only requires that the offer contain the quantity term. Chip has stated that it wants a manufacturer to commit to delivering 1,000 units of Part X. Therefore, the quantity term is definitively identified, and this is sufficient under the UCC.
As such, this element is met.
Here, re (c), Chip sent this letter to other manufacturers including Company B. Both Company A and Company B responded to the offer, so they received the offers, hence it was communicated to them. As such, the offer was communicated to identifiable offeree, including Company A and Company B.
As such, this element is met.
??6

Therefore, elements (a), (b), and (c) are met. As such, Chip has made a valid offer to the manufacturers, including Company B.
Firm Offer
At common law, offers are not allowed to be held open as irrevocable unless they are supported by consideration. Under the UCC however, a firm offer will hold the offer open without consideration if there is (a) a writing between merchants (b) promising to hold the offer open for a period no longer than 3 month, (c) signed by the offering merchant.
Here, re (a), the July 1 letter was in writing and went from Chip to manufacturers of Part X. Therefore, this was a writing between merchants.
As such, this element is met.
Here, re (b), Chip promised to contract with the first company to commit to providing the part by July 8. Absent another company accepting Chip's offer, the offer will be help open by its terms until July 8, which is within 3 months of the offer being made.
As such, this element is met.
Here, re (c), the facts do not specifically state that the offer was signed. However, it is likely that the letter was on Chip's company letterhead, which would suffice for a signed writing.
As such, this element is met.
Therefore, elements (a) (b) and (c) are met, Chip has created a valid firm offer that is irrevocable and held open to accept until July 8.
?7

Acceptance
Acceptance requires (a) an offeree with power of acceptance (b) give unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer, and (c) communicated to the offeror.
July 3
Here, re (a), Company A received the offer-letter from Chip and was responding to it. This shows that Company A knew of the offer, and was given the power to accept by Chip.
As such, this element is met.
Here, re (b), Company A said that it "might" be able to provide the parts to Chip. This is an illusory promise at best. Company A has not committed itself to providing the parts to Chip, as Chip requested in the offer. This defeats the essential term of Chip wanting the manufacturer to commit to providing the parts, not a "maybe" provide the parts. Chip needs certainty that its requirement will be met. Therefore, Company A has not assent to the terms of the offer.
As such, this element is not.
Here, re (c), Company A told Chip that is might be able to provide the parts. Chip later sent a letter to all other manufacturers in response to this, so we know that Chip heard this communication, and Chip was the offeror.
As such, this element is met.
Therefore, elements (a) and (c) are met, but (b) is not. As such, Company A did not validly accept Chip's offer.
??8

Here, timely acceptance requires that the offeree accept the offer before it lapses - by July 8th - or before Chip indirectly revokes by contracting with another party, because the offer said Chip would contract only with the first company. Here, Company would have been timely because they accepted prior to July 8, and Chip had not contracted with another company. However, as discussed above, Company A did not validly accept Chip's offer.
As such, Chip's offer is still held open to be accepted before July 8.
July 4 Revocation
An offeror can revoke their offer by directly stating that they are terminating the power of acceptance, or indirectly by contracting with another party.
Here, Chip attempted to state that their offer was invalid now and no one had the power to accept it by telling the manufacturers to disregard their offer-letter. However, because this is a firm offer, it is held open without consideration and irrevocable for the stated, here, until July 8.
Further, Company did not validly accept Chip's offer, therefore Chip has not indirectly revoked by contracting with another party.
As such, Chip's offer remains open until July 8 or until Chip valid contracts with a Company.
July 7 Acceptance
Acceptance requires (a) an offeree with power of acceptance (b) give unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer, and (c) communicated to the offeror.
????9

Here, re (a), Company B received Chip's offer-letter and is responding to it. This shows that Company B is an offeree with the power of acceptance, as intended by Chip.
As such, this element is met.
Here, re (b), Company B stated that they accept Chip's offer and will supply Chip with the 1,000 units of Part X by July 31 on the terms specified herein. This recital shows that Company B intend to accept Chip's offer and is serious about as they repeated and assented to every material term that Chip requested be assented to. Therefore, Company B has unequivocally assented to the terms of Chip's offer.
As such, this element is met.
Here, re (c), Company B delivered their letter of acceptance to Chip. Chip was the offeror. Therefore, Company B has communicated this acceptance to Chip.
As such, this element is met.
Therefore, elements (a) (b) and (c) are met. As such, Company B as validly accepted Chip's offer.
Timely acceptance requires that the offeree accept the offer before it lapses - July 8, or before the offeror indirectly revokes by contracting with another party first.
Here, Company B delivered its acceptance before July 8, and Chip had not validly contracted with another party.
As such, Company B has timely accepted Chip's offer.
10

Consideration
Consideration requires a bargained-for exchange of legal detriment. Legal detriment is doing or promising something that you don't have legal obligation to do, or not doing or promising to not do something that you have a legal right to do.
Here, Chip promises to buy the parts from the first-committing company, and Company B agreed to supply to the parts to Chip. These promised were sought in exchange for each other. Chip does not have to buy the parts, and Company does not have to supply the parts. They have promised to give their respective legal detriment in exchange of each other.
As such, there is valid consideration.
DEFENSES
Statute of Frauds
Contracts for the sale of goods $500 or more are required to be in writing to be enforceable.
Here, the contract price is $20,000 - this is above $500, and therefore required to be in writing.
Here, even thought there is not actual contract in writing, the statute of frauds may be satisfied by a sufficient memo. A sufficient memo requires the party to be charged to sign a writing that contains the essential term.
Here, the party to be charged, Chip, has signed a writing (its offer-letter on letterhead) that has all the essential terms.
??11

This will satisfy the statute of frauds, and not prevent the enforcement of the contract. As such, there is a valid, enforceable contract between Company and Chip.
(2) DOES CONTRACT CONTAIN WARRANTY
Additional Terms in Acceptance between Merchants
Under the UCC, when an acceptance is between merchants, and the acceptance contains additional terms, the additional terms become part of the contract unless the offeror objects, they materially alter the contract, or the accepted is conditioned on the offeror's acceptance of the additional terms.
Here, Company B and Chip are merchants. Company B's additional term of warranty against product defects will not be objected to by Chip because it benefits them; the term does not materially alter the contract because they are accepted the material terms of quantity, price, delivery time, etc; and the term is not conditioned on Chip accepted the term as Company said they accept the terms put forth by Chip, and made this additional term a collateral promise.
As such, the contract contains a warranty against manufacturing defects.
As set forth above, (1) Company B has a contract with Chip to supply 1,000 units of Part X because Chip's revocation was ineffective. (2) The contract between Company B and Chip contains a warranty against manufacturing defects.
??12

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 1
1. Company B (B) v. Chip, Inc. (C) Applicable Law
A contract for the sale of goods in governed by the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC). Goods are any tangible chattel identifiable at the time of formation.
The present agreement involves the sale of a computer part, Part X. A computer part is a tangible chattel identifiable at the formation stage of the possible agreement between C and B.
Therefore, the UCC is the applicable law to this case. Formation
In order for an enforceable contract to exist between B and C, B must establish that there was an offer that the offer was accepted, and that adequate consideration existed between the parties in the agreement.
Offer
An offer is the outward manifestation of present contractual intent that is definite and certain in terms, communicated to the offeree.
The communication from C to B on July 1st identified that price ($20 per unit), subject matter (Part X), parties (C and B), and time of performance (July 31st). Also, under the UCC an offer must contain the quantity. C's letter to B stated that 1,000 unit of Part X were being requested. Therefore, the communication from C to B was definite and certain in terms.
????13

C will contend that this July 1st letter was merely a proclamation of a willingness to negotiate as evidenced by the fact that C sent this letter to several manufacturers. However, C's language of "we will buy from the first manufacturer to commit itself" shows its intent to be bound by the terms contained in the communication. This language at its core states first come first served, which is an offer to contract and not merely a willingness to negotiate.
Furthermore, the letter was communicated to the offeree, B as C sent the letter by mail and B received the letter. This is shown by the fact that B responded to the letter. Therefore, C's communication to B on July 1st is an offer to contract creating the power to accept in B.
Revocation
C's letter to B, sent on July 4th, states that C wishes B to "disregard the letter we sent on July 1st." This language evidences an intent to revoke the offer previously sent to B. The question would therefore be whether C had the power to revoke the offer.
The general rule is that the offeror is the master of the offer and may revoke at any time. However, if C is declared a merchant in the computer field, then C's offer of July 1st may be a firm offer, in which case C would not have the power to revoke the offer and it would remain open for B to accept until July 8th.
A merchant is one with peculiar knowledge in the relevant field who often deals with the subject matter involved. The facts state that C manufactures computers and is attempting to acquire 1,000 parts for its computers. A manufacturer of computers deals in the business of computer parts on a regular basis. Moreover, the fact that C is attempting to acquire such a large number of parts suggests that C manufactures many computers and is not simply a small business just getting started. Therefore, C is deemed to be a merchant.
?14

As a merchant, C's offer of July 1st will be held to be a firm offer if it is signed by C. The facts do not state that the letter was signed, however, as B was aware of who sent the letter, as evidenced by its ability to respond to the correct address, C would have had to presumably identify itself in some form in the July 1st letter. If this was done with a stamp and typed letter head or any other identifying element, then the letter would be signed.
Thus, because C is considered a merchant in the computer field and because it can be reasonably inferred that the offer of July 1st was signed by C, C's offer is a firm offer and is irrevocable until the time stated of July 8th.
Therefore, C's attempted revocation of July 4th is to no avail and B still has the power to accept C's offer.
Acceptance
Acceptance is the unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
Under the UCC, any definite expression of acceptance is acceptance even if the communication contains different or additional terms than the offer.
On July 7th, B sent a letter to C that stated that B accepts C's offer and will comply with the terms contained within that offer. This is a definite expression of B's acceptance of C's terms.
C may contend that because B sent the acceptance letter on July 7th and the offer expired on July 8th, C will not receive the letter until after the offer expires and the acceptance will be defective.
However, the mailbox rule states that acceptance is effective upon dispatch if communicated in a commercially reasonable method.
?15

The facts indicate that B accepted C's offer in the form of a letter sent in the mail. Due to the fact that C's offer was also sent in the mail, this means is commercially reasonable because it is the same means as the offer.
Moreover, C's attempted revocation of July 4th, while ineffective, would not have been received by B before the acceptance was on July 7th because July 4th is a national holiday. Revocation is effective upon receipt. Therefore, even if C was not a merchant or the offer was not signed, C's revocation of the offer would still be defective under the mailbox rule.
Therefore, B adequately accepted C's offer. Consideration
Consideration is that which is bargained for in exchange for legal detriment.
The bargain between C and B would be $20,000 in exchange for 1,000 units of Part X. The legal detriment to B is the promise to deliver 1,000 units of Part X and the legal detriment to C is the promise to pay $20,000.
Therefore, the agreement between B and C contains adequate consideration. Because this agreement contains adequate consideration, there is an enforceable contract between B and C
Defenses Statute of Frauds
Contracts for the sale of goods for $500 or more are required to be in writing. The facts state that the contract between B and C is for 1,000 units for $20 each. Therefore, this contract is for $20,000 and has to be in writing.
??16

Sufficient Memorandum
Sufficient memorandum between C and B identifying the parties, quantity, subject matter, and intent to bargain would satisfy the statute of frauds.
The necessary terms as well as intent to bargain are found in C's offer to B of July 1st (discussed supra in Offer) and B's acceptance of July 7th.
Therefore, this contract is not deemed void based on the statute of frauds.
2. Terms of the Contract Different Terms
According to section 2-207 of the UCC, discussed supra, acceptance of an offer may contain different terms of the offer and still create a contract.
C's offer stated that there would be no warranty for manufacturing defects and B's acceptance stated that it would warrant Part X against manufacturing defects.
This warranty is a different term.
There is a split of jurisdictions as to how to determine whose terms govern the contract. A majority of jurisdictions state that the different terms are knocked out and replaced by a gap filler. Therefore, the warranty term would be replaced with the gap filling provision stating that there will be a warranty against defects for a reasonable time.
A minority of jurisdictions state that different terms should be treated as additional terms. Therefore, because C and B are both merchants, the question would be whether the warranty term materially alters the contract. A reasonable merchant in B and C's shoes would probably state that a warranty against defects in 1,000 units of a computer part is a material alteration. Therefore, C must object to the term within a reasonable time or the warranty will become part of the contract.
???17

Question 2
Van is short and small. One day, as he was walking down a street near his office, he was suddenly grabbed by Abe and Bob, who were each much taller and larger than he, and was dragged into an alley. Abe and Bob beat Van severely with brass knuckles and took several items from him, including a ring. Charles had been standing nearby watching the attack. After the attack, Abe and Bob gave Charles the ring they had taken from Van.
Van was traumatized by the attack, and decided to carry a knife for protection.
Not long after the attack, Van was walking down the street near his office when he saw Abe walking toward him. He suddenly felt fear and rage. He quickly pulled out his knife and held it behind his back. Not noticing Van, Abe put his hands into his pocket. Van believed Abe was reaching for his brass knuckles. Van immediately stabbed Abe, killing him instantly. In fact, Abe had been reaching for a bus pass, not brass knuckles.
1. With what crimes, if any, can Bob reasonably be charged and what defenses, if any,can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
2. With what crimes, if any, can Charles reasonably be charged and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
3. With what crimes, if any, can Van reasonably be charged and what defenses, if any,can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
18

1. STATE v. BOB CONSPIRACY
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 2
??Conspiracy is an agreement between two or more people to commit a crime and with the specific intent for that crime to occur. Most jurisdictions require an overt act in furtherance of that crime. Modernly, unilateral agreements are allowed. Most jurisdictions also presume agreement from actions implying an agreement.
Here, Bob suddenly GRABBED Van with Abe. They both beat Van, robbed (infra) him and left him. The State will argue most criminals will not ask for a signed contract before agreeing to do criminal activities. The State will state contend the "concerted" effort in unity and synchronicity illustrated an implied agreement between Bob and Abe to batter and rob him. Their intents were clear from the fact they actually followed-up with their implied agreement by not only an overt act in furtherance, but by actually completing the crimes of battery and robbery (infra).
Abe is not in question here, but should the state choose, he would also be liable for conspiracy under the modern rules in some jurisdictions.
Bob will contend he never agreed with Abe to do anything illegal and it was just a sudden reaction.
Bob may be charged with conspiracy to commit robbery and battery, but whether the State will succeed will be up to the courts.
BATTERY #1
Battery is the unlawful application of force to the person of another.
Here, Bob and Abe applied an unlawful force when they GRABBED him suddenly. Generally, grabbing another would cause a substantial force to hold someone so as to
?19

prevent an escape. The facts do not indicate a consent by Van nor a legal privilege by either Bob or Abe when the grabbed Van.
Thus, Bob will be charged with Battery of Bob when he grabbed him. ASSAULT #1
Assault is the attempted battery (Supra) or the causing of reasonable apprehension of an immediate harmful touching.
When Bob grabbed Van suddenly, there may not have been time for Van to feel any apprehension or notice a threat. However, once the battery occurred, Van could have been reasonably apprehensive as to what was going to happen next, because grabbing usually implies a hold without releasing. One would be very apprehensive when two much larger people grab one suddenly and without provocation.
Here, Bob will be charged with assault of Bob. BATTERY #2--SUPRA
Here, Bob and Abe DRAGGED (use of more force) Van into an alley by grabbing him (forceful touching) and moving him. The facts do not state Van consented to this either and Bob did not have any legal authority for his actions.
Thus, Bob will be charged with the battery of dragging Van into the alley.
??20

AGGRAVATED BATTERY #3--SUPRA, BUT WITH USE OF WEAPONS
Here, Bob and Abe applied unlawful force upon Van by SEVERELY beating him with BRASS KNUCKLES, a weapon used to severely injure the body. Once again, Bob had not legal justifications for his actions of applying harmful force upon Van.
Bob may be charged with aggravated battery as well. FALSE IMPRISONMENT
False imprisonment is the unlawful confinement of another within fixed boundaries for any period of time.
Here, Bob and Abe intended to confine Van by GRABBING him so as to prevent physical escape and then dragging him into an alley. Alleys make escape more difficult, because they have at least two walls and sometimes a dead-end. This would substantially decrease chance of escape. State will also argue Bob had no reason other than robbery and battery to hold Van against is will for the period of time necessary to complete the robbery and battery.
Bob does not seem to have any defense.
Bob will be charged with the crime of false imprisonment. KIDNAPPING
Common Law Kidnapping--under common and old law, kidnapping was taking one out of their country or state without authorization and against their will. Common law rules of kidnapping will not apply here.
???21

Modernly, kidnapping is false imprisonment (SUPRA) plus asportation. Kidnapping is more serious than false imprisonment because asportation (movement) can dramatically increase risk of harm to the victim.
Here, Bob forcefully grabbed and moved (asportation) Van into the alley where a more serious harm did occur when Van was severely beaten with brass knuckles. Van being smaller in stature and confined to an ally with two bigger guys severely beating on him prevented any reasonable escape.
Bob will attempt to say kidnapping is like false imprisonment and Van was only dragged a few steps rather than state lines. He will argue there was no substantial asportation.
The State will successfully counter by saying the asportation element is for prevention of risk to victim. Here, the movement into the alley allowed more time and cover from detection when Bob unleashed his furry on Bob.
Thus, Bob will be charged with kidnapping as well. LARCENY
Larceny is the unlawful taking and caring away personal property of another with the specific intent to permanently deprive.
Here, Bob took SEVERAL ITEMS INCLUDING A RING from Van. These items seem to have been personal property of Van, another. Bob intended to apparently deprive Van of his property, because the violent nature of the taking did not leave room for the likelihood of a civil return of his chattel.
Bob will be charged with larceny of Van's property and ring.
?22

ROBBERY
Robbery is defined as larceny (supra) with use of force, fear or intimidation.
The facts did not state Van consented to the taking of his personal property by Bob. Further, Bob had to have used sufficient force to enter Van's pocket and extract the items and the ring. Further, Bob used brass knuckles to beat and incapacitate Van to the point where he would be able to easily extract Van's personal property from Van's pocket without any resistance.
Bob may be charged with robbery of Bob as well.
DEFENSES
Bob does not seem to have any reasonable defenses based on this fact pattern.
2. STATE v. CHARLES Conspiracy--Supra
Charles will argue he never had an agreement with Bob when Bob decided to batter and rob Van. He will further successfully say he did not have any specific intent for any of those crimes to be committed.
The State will have a daunting task at trying to prove specific intent.
Charles will probably not be charged with Conspiracy.
RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY
Receiving stolen property is obtaining property stolen from another with the knowledge it was stolen and the intent to permanently deprive the rightful owner.
?????23

Here, Charles took the ring which he saw being robbed from Van, another. Charles had scienter of the nature of its acquisition and took it anyway.
Charles will contend he could not say no to two big guys who just beat Van and then gave him the ring, probably as "hush money." Charles will contend he didn't specifically intend to deprive Van because he would give it back. The facts don't state such a case but the facts also abruptly stops with this information.
Charles may be charged with receiving stolen property, but the State will have a huge task in proving intent to deprive element of the crime.
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
Parties to a crime may be charged for accomplice liability if the intended for that crime to occur, had knowledge of its occurrence and actively assisted.
COMMON LAW
Under common law, accomplices were separated into Principles in the 1st and second degree. Principles in the 2nd degree were the ones at the scene of the crime but not committing the actual crime.
PRINCIPAL IN THE 2ND DEGREE
Here, Charles will argue he was not only not committing any of the crimes but he had no knowledge ahead of time, nor did he actively assist.
He will also argue the gratuitous gift was not on a condition that he would thwart the authorities or not report the crime.
He will not be charged with being principle in the second degree.
???24

ACCESSORY AFTER THE FACT
He will also argue the gratuitous gift was not on a condition that he would thwart the authorities or not report the crime.
He will not be charged with being accessory after the fact. MODERN ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY LAW
Modernly, all are accessories. Accessories are liable for all foreseeable natural and probably consequence resulting from their accomplices crimes. However, if the accomplice has rendered assistance after the crime has been completed, he would not be liable for acts prior.
There would only be the crime of accessory after the fact. Charles may be charged with accessory after-the-fact.
MISPRISON
3. STATE v. VAN HOMICIDE
Homicide is the killing of a human being by another. A human being is one who is born and not dead yet. In California, a viable fetus is also considered a human being.
Here, Abe, was an alive human being who was killed in an accident. There was a homicide.
CAUSATION
In order for murder to be proven, there must be both actual and proximate cause. ACTUAL CAUSE: But for Van stabbing Abe, Abe would not have died instantly.
??????25

PROXIMATE CAUSE: It is foreseeable that being stabbed by a deadly weapon such as a knife, one would sustain life-threatening wounds. Charles was killed instantly from such a wound and thus there is proximate causation as well.
MURDER
Murder is the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought. Malice can be established by one of the following 4 ways:
MALICE
1. Felony Murder Rule (FMR)--FMR is the a killing which occurs during the commission of one or more of the inherently dangerous felonies. These felonies are rape, robbery, burglary, arson, mayhem and the like.
Here, Van was not in the commission of one of the above-motioned felonies and thus malice may not be established for FMR.
2. Specific Intent--Malice can be achieved if the defendant actually and specifically wanted to kill.
Here, the State will argue Van carried a knife, a deadly object used for killing, and took it out to use it against Abe. The state will also say Van was RAGING and most likely to get revenge for Abe beating him earlier.
Van will argue he never intended to kill for no reason. Van will attempt to say he was merely protecting himself.
If the State charges Van with Murder, we would have to go to the degrees.
3. Intent to commit great bodily harm/injury--one needs to only intend to create great bodily injury to created the intent needed to establish malice.
??26

Here, the State will also argue that carrying a knife and approaching Abe to stab his was a reckless act creating great bodily harm. State will say Van could have stepped away and retreated because they were not indoors or a place where escape was not possible.
4. Wanton and reckless act showing careless disregard for human life--Malice may be established if a defendant realized the risks involved, but acted or omitted to act, and that act/omission caused substantial harm. Does not apply here.
First Degree Murder
First degree murder is killing with premeditation and deliberation and those killing enumerated by legislation such as: lying and wait, use of explosives, use of armor- piercing bullets, and the like.
The State will argue Van carried a knife in anticipation of meeting with Bob and Abe one day. When Van saw his chance at Abe, he HID his knife behind his back. The State will argue this was a deliberate plan and premeditation to kill Abe.
Van will argue he was just holding his knife ready to defend himself if the situation arose. He will insist his previous beating led him to believe, even if mistakenly, he needed to protect himself from similar harm as before.
If the State does not charge for first degree murder, we move down to second degree murder.
Second Degree Murder
Second degree murder is all murder which is not first degree murder, but there is malice.
??27

Here, the State will argue even if first degree doesn't apply, there was malice because of the inherently dangerous act of stabbing someone with a knife. Van will argue there was no malice, only self defense. He will argue he couldn't take any chances because he was GRABBED SUDDENLY the last time and was afraid he would have not time to react.
Thus, he was merely preparing for self defense.
If Van is not charged with first degree, he may be charged with second degree murder.
MITIGATION
VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Voluntary manslaughter is the intentional killing of a human being with the specific intent to kill but with malice being mitigated due to some provocation, or other mitigating circumstance.
Van will argue his killing of Abe resulted with sudden provocation brought about by the RAGE he felt from his last beating delivered by Abe. He will argue he did not have sufficient time to COOL DOWN. He will also argue he was acting in self defense because Abe was REACHING for potentially BRASS NUCKLES, AGAIN.
Abe will most likely be charged with voluntary manslaughter.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Involuntary manslaughter is an unlawful killing of another without the specific intent, but with negligence. Negligence has to be established by the standard of reasonableness. The defendant who had a duty of care, breached that duty and that breached caused harm, will be criminally liable.
???28

If all else fails for the State because of property defense by Van, State may try to offer a plea deal for involuntary manslaughter so as to get a conviction and reduce court expenses.
DEFENSES SELF DEFENSE
Van will argue he was reasonably and truly afraid for his life when he stabbed Abe as Abe was reaching down in his pocket. He will argue the last time Abe saw him, he grabbed brass knuckles from his pocket and severely beat him.
The State will argue Van could have left the area and called the police rather than stick his ground and fight.
If Van is not successful in his theory of self defense, he will argue for the defense infra. IMPERFECT SELF DEFENSE
Van will say while his tactics were not reasonable, one could foresee the TRAUMA he was suffering from when he irrationally attempted to defend himself by stabbing Abe before seeing if there was a weapon.
CRIME PREVENTION
Van will argue he was also attempting to prevent yet another battery upon himself and potentially another robber. This will not be successful as preemptively deadly attacks are not justifiable for situations not showing a threat to his life. Van will argue based on history, his life was in danger and a crime was going to occur.
This will also fail as a defense.
????29

DOMESTIC AUTHORITY
The facts do not say Van was attempting to make an arrest. Even if he was, as a private citizen, he would have had to make the arrest at time of the criminal acts.
?30

ANSWER B TO QUESTION 2
1. STATE V. BOB ASSAULT/AGGRAVATED ASSAULT
Assault is the criminal intent to cause an offensive or harmful touching or battery. Aggravated assault is when a weapon is used increase the imminent threat of harm such as brass knuckles.
Here, the facts state that Van was a much smaller man than Bob and that Bob approached Van and suddenly grabbed him. The facts are not clear whether Van saw Bob and Abe approaching or not but if he did see them approaching then Bob will be liable for an aggravated assault.
BATTERY/AGGRAVATED BATTERY
A battery is a general intent crime which is the criminal intent to cause an offensive or harmful touching of another that does actually cause such an offensive contact.
Here, Bob grabbed Van and dragged him and then beat him with brass knuckles. This is an aggravated battery because Bob and Abe used brass knuckles to beat Van. Brass knuckles are considered a weapon and weapons used in the battery escalate the battery to an aggravated battery. Bob will be liable for aggravated Battery.
FALSE IMPRISONMENT
False Imprisonment is a general intent crime which is usually seen as a misdemeanor is many jurisdictions but it is the confining of another person to a bounded area defined by the actor with no reasonable means of escape.
Here because Van was grabbed and dragged to an area he was then confined to that area while he was beaten and robbed. Bob may argue that Van had a reasonable
????31

means to escape if he had been able to get up and run away but the fact that Van was grabbed and dragged shows that he was not able to get up and run away and escape and then beaten severely thus creating an inability to run away or escape. A reasonable person would have gotten away from such a beating if they had been able but two men much larger beating on another man would definitely create an inability to escape for that time period. Bob will be held liable for the crime of False Imprisonment.
KIDNAPPING
Kidnapping is a general intent crime which is the confining of another person with no reasonable means of escape and then moving them to another location, also known as asportation. Although most jurisdictions require the movement from one location to another to be substantial, the state may argue that grabbing Van and dragging him to another relocation less out of view was a form of kidnapping. Van was confined to that area and unable to escape on his own and therefore it is possible that Bob will be found liable for kidnapping.
ROBBERY
Robbery is a specific intent crime which is the taking of another's personal property with force or threat of force with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here, Bob grabbed a man and dragged him with force to a location where he beat the man and took several items including a ring. This is clearly force and a threat of force that created a robbery from Van. Taking of his personal items off of his person is the traspassory taking required. The facts do not state that either Bob or Abe had any intent to return the personal items that they took from Bob and it is implied that they had the intent to permanently deprive, especially since they gave one item away to someone standing nearby. Bob will be held liable for Robbery of Van.
LARCENY
???32

Larceny is a specific intent crime which is the trespassory taking and carrying away of another's personal property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of their property. Usually one can only be found liable for either robbery or larceny because they are merely one version of the other. If for any reason Bob was not found to have created enough force against Van to be defined as robbery then the trespassory taking of Van's personal items, meaning without his consent, and taking them away with the intent to permanently deprive will hold Bob liable for Larceny of Van's belongings.
SOLICITATION
Solicitation is the asking of another to commit a crime. The asking may be implied through words or conduct and does not necessarily need to be in expressed words.
Here, Bob and Abe gave Charles a piece of stolen property thus implying a request that he receive the stolen property. It may have been implied in order to buy Charles silence and create him as part of the criminal conduct so that he would not expose them or call the police on them but that is not clear on the facts. What is clear is that giving Charles a ring was asking him to commit a crime through implication and conduct. Bob can be found liable for solicitation.
Merger Rule
Solicitation merges with the target crime or with conspiracy. If Charles is found to be a co-conspirator then the solicitation of Charles to commit a crime will merge with conspiracy.
CONSPIRACY
Conspiracy is a specific intent crime which is an agreement between two or more people to commit a crime. In the minority view it was required merely to have an agreement but the modern view requires an overt act in furtherance of the crime.
???33

Here, the facts do not state that there was an agreement expressed between Abe and Bob but it is implied based on their actions that they agreed to commit the crime of robbery of Van as they worked in cohorts together to grab Van and drag him aside and then beat him and take his belongings.
Overt Act in Furtherance:
There is clearly an overt act in furtherance of the crime based on the fact that they did actually carry brass knuckles on their person in order to accomplish this criminal conduct. Bob also did grab Van and drag him and beat him and rob him thus an overt act element has been fulfilled.
Bob is liable for Conspiracy with Abe. Co-conspiracy Liability/Pinkerton Rule
According to the Pinkerton Rule of co-conspiracy liability, any fellow conspirators can be held liable for the other conspirator's acts and crimes that were completed in furtherance of the target crime conspired to. Because Bob and Abe were co- conspirators then they will be held liable for any crimes that were completed in furtherance of the target crime of attacking, assaulting, battering and robbing Van.
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
Accomplice Liability is the act of encouraging or counseling another to commit a crime, mere presence is not enough, aiding must be active. Here, it can be argued that Bob was an accomplice to Charles in aiding his crime e of receipt of stolen property discussed infra. Bob not only aided but he gave the ring to Charles after Charles watched the whole crime happen.
???34

The facts are not clear as to any counseling of Abe but he definitely worked in cohorts with Abe to grab Van and attack him and create the robbery therefore Bob is held liable for accomplice liability for Abe and possibly with Charles.
Accessory/Principal
An accessory to a crime is one who aids before or during the crime another who is in the commission of a crime. A principal is the one who actually commits the crime and is present at the crime. Bob is the principal of the crimes of assault, battery and robbery of Van. Bob may be an accessory before the fact for Charles.
DEFENSES Withdrawal
Any defense of withdrawal would need to show the defendant withdrawing or trying to stop the criminal behavior prior to the crime. Bob showed no attempt to withdraw on these facts.
There are no valid defenses for Bob. CONCLUSION
Bob will be found liable for conspiracy, Assault, Battery, Robbery or Larceny, False Imprisonment with no appropriate defenses.
????35

2. STATE V. CHARLES SOLICITATION
Solicitation is the asking of another to commit a crime.
Here, Charles did not ask anyone to commit a crime but it can be argued by the state that his watching of Abe and Bob while they beat another person and stole from him was an implied invitation to be part of the criminal behavior. The asking may be implied by actions or conduct and does not need to be expressed through words. Charles made no movement or conduct or actions that obviously asked to participate in a crime with Bob and Abe. Charles will probably not be found liable for solicitation.
Merger-defines supra
Charles probably will not be found liable for solicitation so there is no merging of solicitation to a higher crime.
CONSPIRACY-defined supra
Charles may have been found to impliedly conspire with Abe and Bob as he watched them committing the criminal conduct to Van. The facts do not state any conduct or behavior that would indicate an agreement with Abe or Bob accept merely watching them attack him and steal from him. Charles probably will not be held liable for conspiracy on the attack of Van but his taking of the stolen ring may be found to be an agreement with Abe and Bob thus creating a conspiracy regarding the robbery of the ring.
Co-Conspirator Liability/Pinkerton Rule-defined supra
If Charles is found to have impliedly agreed to conspire in the taking of the ring from Van then he will be held liable for all of Bob and Abe's crimes that were involved in the furtherance of the taking of the ring.
?????36

RECEIPT OF STOLEN PROPERTY
Receipt of Stolen Property is the receiving of stolen goods by the defendant who knows that they are stolen and the defendant has the intent to permanently deprive the owner of the property of the goods.
Here, Charles watched Abe and Bob take the items including the ring from Van and when Abe and Bob gave Charles the stolen ring it was clear that he knew it was stolen from Van. Charles did not give the ring back to Van nor do the facts indicate that he meant to return the item to Van therefore it is implied on these facts that Charles had an intention of keeping the ring and permanently depriving Van of his property. Charles can be found liable for the receipt of stolen property.
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY-defined supra
Charles stood by and watched Abe and Bob attack and steal from Van. While this may be morally apprehensible it is not illegal and does not indicate accomplice liability. Mere silence and presence is not enough. Aiding must be active. If Charles had said encouraging words or even nodded his head then this would have been seen as accomplice liability but his watching quietly with no behavior indicating encouragement does not hold him liable for accomplice liability.
Accessory After the Fact
Someone who assists a criminal after the crime in either hiding or aiding and abetting them is considered an accessory after the fact. The state may argue that Charles receipt of the stolen property was a way for Bob and Abe to get rid of the hot goods and therefore aided Bob and Abe in their robbery and attack on Van. An accessory must have the intent of helping the criminal and the target crime and the facts do not state any evidence of Charles having an intent to help Abe and Bob. Charles probably cannot be found liable for an accessory after the fact.
???37

DEFENSES Mistake
Mistake is a defense when it negates the criminal intent for a specific intent crime even if the mistake is unreasonable. Charles may argue that the receipt of stolen property was a mistake but the facts do not indicate that he made any effort to correct his mistake or that he felt a mistake occurred when he took the ring from Bob and Abe.
Duress
Duress is a defense used when the defendant felt fear of imminent threat of harm to himself or someone else in close relationship to him and that the threat was reasonable. Charles may argue that he took the ring from Bob and Abe in fear of what they might do to him if he did not take the ring. Bob and Abe clearly were larger men that just beat another man severely in front of Charles. It might be reasonable to assume that Charles would be afraid that Abe and Bob were threatening to him and if he did not take the stolen property of the ring that he could fear of an imminent and immediate threat that Bob and Abe would begin immediately beating him and robbing from him. If Charles felt any immediate threat from Bob and Abe, this would be a valid defense for him.
CONCLUSION
Charles will be found liable for receipt of stolen property but will probably have a valid defense of duress.
3. STATE V. VAN MURDER
Murder is the intentional and unlawful killing of another human being with malice aforethought.
??????38

Here, Van killed Abe but whether or not it will be murder will depend on whether his acts were legally justified.
HOMICIDE
Homicide is the killing of another human being. A human being is considered dead when their internal organs such as their heart stop functioning or when their brain activity ceases. Here, the facts state that Abe died thus we have a homicide by Van.
CAUSATION Actual Cause
The actual cause is found by using the "but for" test asking but for the defendant's actions, the victim would not be dead.
Here, but for Van's actions Abe would not be dead. But for Van stabbing Abe with a knife, Abe would not be dead. Van is the actual cause of Abe's death.
Proximate Cause
A defendant is only liable for consequences that are reasonably foreseeable at the time of the injury and are not too remote or improbable.
Here, it is reasonably foreseeable that when you take out a knife and stab someone with it that they will be injured and possibly die from that action. This is not too remote or improbable and is a foreseeable consequence of that action. Van will be found to be the proximate cause of Abe's death.
MALICE
?????39

Malice aforethought is defined through four factors, intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily harm, a depraved heart and/or felony murder. If Van was found to have malice aforethought then he will be found guilty of murder.
Intent to Kill
When defendant's actions are substantially certain to cause death to the victim.
Here, it is not clear on the facts if Van had an intent to kill but when one uses a knife it is seen as a deadly weapon then it is implied that there is an intent to kill and Van used a knife to stab Abe. It can be implied by the weapon used and the actions of Van that he intended to kill Abe.
Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Harm
When defendant acts with knowledge that his actions pose a significant threat of serious injury or death to the victim yet he continues with the actions.
Van stabbing a knife into Abe can be considered an act to at least intend to cause serious bodily harm. A knife is a weapon such that using it on another human being is more likely than not to cause serious bodily harm. It is not expressed in the facts but implied by Van's conduct that he knew that stabbing Abe with a knife would cause serious bodily harm if not death and yet he continued anyway. Van can be seen as having the intent to cause serious bodily harm.
Depraved Heart
Defendant acts with a conscious disregard of his actions posing extreme recklessness towards the injury or harm to another.
Here, Van took a knife and stabbed Abe with it which would at least be in reckless disregard for human life at the level of gross recklessness. This action pose a
???40

substantial threat of harm or injury to Abe. Van would be seen as having a depraved heart at the very minimum of malice aforethought.
Felony Murder
A killing that occurs during the commission of a felonious independent crime that is inherently dangerous.
Here, Van was not in the commission of a felonious crime when he ran across Abe and stabbed him so the felony murder doctrine would not apply to these facts.
FIRST DEGREE MURDER
First Degree Murder is the intentional killing of another human being with malice aforethought and premeditation.
The state may argue that Van had premeditation as well as malice aforethought and that Van would be liable for first degree murder of Abe.
Premeditation
Premeditation is the deliberate and conscious planning ahead of time to commit the murder. There are two main views on premeditation.
The Carroll theory: The theory of premeditation set forth in the Carroll case stated that there was premeditation if there was deliberate and purposeful thought to the defendant's actions. The state may argue that Van carried a knife on him and when he saw Abe pulled the knife out and hid it behind his back and this constituted purposeful and deliberate thought enough to be considered premeditation. Van will argue that he was carrying the knife for his own protection only.
???41

The Anderson Theory: The view of premeditation set forth by the Anderson Case stated that premeditation is found by a preconceived design and that no time is too short to formulate such a design. The state may argue that Van carrying his knife on his person and pulling it out and hiding it behind his back was the manifestation of a preconceived design that was formulated upon his seeing Abe. Again, Van may argue that his knife was only carried on his person for self protection.
Based on premeditation, Van could be found liable for First Degree Murder. SECOND DEGREE MURDER
Murder in the second degree is defined as the intentional killing of another human being with malice aforethought, gross recklessness or a depraved heart.
As discussed supra Van can be found to have one of the four factors to define malice aforethought through either the intent to kill, the intent to cause serious bodily harm or a depraved heart. Van could be found liable for second degree murder.
DEFENSES Self Defense
When the defendant acted with reasonable force without inciting the need on himself uses force reasonably necessary to protect himself.
Here, Van felt a need to protect himself which was brought on from his previous attack from Abe. The use of self defense in most jurisdictions must be such that the defendant did not provoke this need himself. Van did not provoke Abe to attack him on these facts. However, Abe will argue that as he was walking down the street he did not even notice Van and was merely putting his hands in his pocket. Van will argue that because of Abe's prior attack on Van that Van feared for his safety and that his use of self defense was not unreasonable. Van was not attacked to the point of fearing for his life from Abe or Bob prior to the incident where he pulled his knife and the State may argue
???42

that Van's need to use deadly force was unreasonable. If Van's use of a deadly weapon to protect himself is seen as excessive then he can claim imperfect self defense.
Imperfect Self Defense
When force is required that may be unreasonable but honest belief that it is needed to protect himself or if the defendant brought the action on himself by instigating the situation or escalating a situation.
Here, Van may argue that his use of deadly force against Abe was reasonable to him on a subjective level based on the history of not only being attacked so violently but that actual recent attack having come from Abe directly. The state may argue as stated above that when Abe and Bob attacked Van prior to the knife incident it was not with deadly force and it was not life threatening so that it was unreasonable for Van to use deadly force to protect himself. Also based on the analysis of voluntary manslaughter infra Van may be justified in his attack and killing of Abe and Imperfect Self Defense would be a valid defense for Van.
Reasonable Person
The need for reasonable self defense is actually measured subjectively if a person with that reasonable experience and situation is found to be reasonable in his belief. Based on this level, Van will probably be seen as having a reasonable need for self defense against Abe.
Van will probably be found to have been reasonable in his belief that he needed to protect himself from Abe and either Self Defense will be a valid defense for him or at the very lease imperfect self defense based on voluntary manslaughter will be a valid defense for him.
??43

Mistake-defined supra
Mistake is only a defense if it can show that it negated the intent required for a specific intent crime so if Van is found to have intended to kill Abe then a defense of mistake can negate the intent to kill element of murder. Van may argue that it was a mistake to have stabbed Abe but the fact that he held the knife behind his back and then stabbed Abe is evidence against a mistake and leans more towards purposeful actions. Mistake will probably not be a valid defense for Van.
VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
When a defendant is provoked such that a reasonable person would be provoked into such a passionate act without adequate cooling time
Adequate Provocation:
When Van saw Abe walking towards him, the facts state that he suddenly felt fear and rage. The adequate provocation must be such that a reasonable person would be provoked to such a rage or heat of passion. The state may argue that it is not reasonable to have someone walking down the street putting their hands in their pockets to incite a person to such rage and fear however, because of Van's previous attack from Abe the court will probably find it reasonable that Van would think that Abe might be carrying his brass knuckles and might be planning another attack knowing now that Abe had the propensity to cause him such harm. The court will probably find that Van was reasonably and adequately provoked to rage.
No adequate Cooling Time:
Another element of Voluntary Manslaughter is that upon the adequate provocation, there is not enough time for the rage or provocation to cool down and for the defendant to have found a calmer state of mind. Here, Van was walking down the street and his rage and fear were provoked upon seeing Abe and then Abe continued to come closer and closer to him thus provoking a more intense feeling which would be the opposite of
????44

adequate cooling time. It is reasonable that there was no adequate cooling time for Van after being provoked to such rage and fear upon the sight of Abe.
Van will probably be found to have committed Voluntary Manslaughter because of the provocation being reasonable upon seeing Abe and there being no adequate cooling time.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Involuntary Manslaughter is the unintentional killing of another human being with gross negligence.
Here, Van's stabbing of Abe was intentional and it created an instantaneous result of Abe's death. It would be hard for Van to argue that this was gross negligence. Van probably will not be found liable for Involuntary Manslaughter.
CONCLUSION
Van will be held liable for Murder of Abe but will have a valid defense of Self Defense and can at least mitigate the murder down to Voluntary Manslaughter.
??45

Question 3
Superstore is a 24-hour grocery store. For safety reasons, Superstore has installed bright lights in its parking lot that turn on in response to loud noises. The lights turn on several times a week, especially during the night, and have caused neighboring homeowners to complain of loss of sleep and various adverse health consequences.
One night, Ned and Carl exited Superstore, each carrying a heavy bag. Ned is the publisher of a local newspaper and Carl is a business consultant. As they exited, they accidentally bumped into each other, each causing the other to drop his bag and spill its contents. A loud argument ensued. Ned took several steps toward Carl; Carl threw an orange at Ned and grazed his pant leg without injuring him; and Ned punched Carl in the stomach. The loudness of the argument caused the lights in the parking lot to turn on. Soon, a Superstore security guard arrived and restored order.
The next day, Ned published an account of the incident, calling Carl a "coward and a liar." Carl experienced a substantial decrease in business consulting thereafter.
1. What tort claim or claims can Ned reasonably bring against Carl, and what defense or defenses can Carl reasonably raise? Discuss.
2. What tort claim or claims can Carl reasonably bring against Ned, and what defense or defenses can Ned reasonably raise? Discuss.
3. What tort claim or claims can the neighboring homeowners reasonably bring against Superstore? Discuss.
46

1.NED V. CARL ASSAULT
ANSWER A TO QUESTION 3
??Defined, supra. Here, Ned and Carl first "accidentally bump into each other." Since this was an accident, there was no intent, and therefore this did not constitute ASSAULT.
However, then "Carl threw an orange at Ned and grazed his pant leg." Throwing a physical object at another person reasonably causes apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive contact. Since Ned subsequently punched Carl, he was clearly put in apprehension. CARL IS LIABLE FOR ASSAULT.
BATTERY
Defined, supra. Note: the contact does not need to be made by the defendant directly; it may be achieved by an instrumentality. Also, for the purposes of BATTERY, the physical contact may be to anything closely associated with a person, such as their clothes.
"Carl threw an orange at Ned and grazed his pant leg." Since Carl threw the orange "at Ned," Carl demonstrated intent to cause the orange to make physical contact with Ned. "But for" Carl's throwing the orange, Ned (via his pant leg) would not have suffered offensive physical contact; thus Carl caused the contact with Ned. Having a piece of fruit thrown at one would constitute offensive contact. Since Carl intentionally caused offensive physical contact with Ned, the person of another, CARL IS LIABLE FOR BATTERY.
?47

DEFENSE TO ASSAULT AND BATTERY SELF-DEFENSE
A person is entitled to protect him/herself with the degree of force necessary, if he reasonably believes another will imminently commit a violent act against him/her.
Carl will argue that when "Ned took several steps toward Carl," Ned was put in reasonable apprehension of imminent violence. Carl's response of throwing an orange was not deadly force, and will probably be considered reasonable under the circumstances. Though it appears that Carl was an equal initiator of the verbal confrontation, he did not cause Ned any apprehension of violence. THUS CARL'S ARGUMENT OF SELF-DEFENSE WILL BE SUCCESSFUL.
2.CARL V. NED ASSAULT
A tortuous ASSAULT is the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of immediate harmful or offensive contact. The plaintiff must be apprehensive.
Here, Ned and Carl first "accidentally bump into each other." Since this was an accident, there was no intent, and therefore this did not constitute ASSAULT.
However, during a "loud argument," "Ned took several steps toward Carl" and Carl's response was to throw an orange at Ned. Given the context of the argument, Ned's taking several steps would reasonably put Carl, another, in apprehension of harmful or offensive contact.
NED IS LIABLE FOR ASSAULT. BATTERY
A tortuous BATTERY is the intentional causing of harmful or offensive contact to the person of another.
??????48

Ned "punched Carl in the stomach." When someone punches another in the stomach, intent is self-evident. "But for" Ned's punch, Carl would not have suffered harmful physical contact; thus Ned caused the contact with Carl. A punch in the stomach is inherently harmful contact. Since Ned intentionally caused harmful contact to Carl, the person of another, NED IS LIABLE FOR BATTERY.
DEFENSE TO ASSAULT AND BATTERY SELF-DEFENSE
A person is entitled to protect him/herself with the degree of force necessary, if he reasonably believes another will imminently commit a violent act against him/her.
Ned will argue that when "Carl threw an orange at Ned and grazed his pant leg," Ned was put in reasonable apprehension of imminent violence. However, Ned's response to a grazed pant leg was disproportionate, and Ned escalated the altercation to deadly force by punching Carl in the stomach. NED'S ARGUMENT OF SELF-DEFENSE WILL FAIL.
DEFAMATION
DEFAMATION is the publication to a third party of information "of and concerning the plaintiff" that is false and harms the plaintiff's reputation.
LIBEL is publishing the defamatory information in a manner that is fairly permanent, e.g., in a newspaper.
Normally, special damages do not need to be proved for any form of LIBEL, but they are certainly presumed for LIBEL PER SE. LIBEL PER SE is libelous publication of defamatory information that alleges:
i) Unchastely
ii) Commission of a crime of moral turpitude
iii) A person is incompetent in his business or profession OR
???49

iv) A loathsome disease (traditionally leprosy or a venereal disease)
Here, Ned "published an account of [the altercation between him and Carl]" and in the newspaper publication called Carl a "coward and a liar." This information was "of and concerning" Carl, and it was published to third parties (the newspaper's readers). Ned had nothing on which to base the allegation that Carl was a liar, and thus the information was false. Since Carl "experienced a substantial decrease in business consulting thereafter," it is arguable that the decrease was a result of the allegation. The publication clearly harmed Carl's reputation. Since being a "coward and a liar" clearly implies that a person is not competent as a business consultant, Ned's publication constitutes LIBEL PER SE and Carl does not need to prove special damages. Since Carl was not a public personality and this occurrence was not of public concern, there are no constitutional elements to be dealt with.
DEFENSES TO DEFAMATION
Ned will argue that he had the limited privileges of publishing an opinion, and of publishing a report of a public incident. However, Ned surpassed and thus made ineffective these privileges by showing malice, a reckless indifference to the truth or falsity of the allegations. NED'S DEFENSES TO DEFAMATION WILL FAIL.
INTENTIONAL INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS (IIED)
IIED is the intentional or reckless causing of severe emotional distress as a result of outrageous conduct ("beyond all decency tolerated by society").
The reasonable person knows that publishing an allegation in a newspaper that a businessperson is a "coward and a liar" is likely to cause that businessperson severe emotional distress. Thus, Ned's publishing this allegation to the readers of a local newspaper was done in a reckless or intentional manner. Publication of such a lie would constitute outrageous conduct.
??50

NED IS LIABLE FOR IIED. 3.HOMEOWNERS V. SUPERSTORE
NUISANCE
A PRIVATE NUISANCE is a nontrespassory interference with a land possessor's use or enjoyment of his property. Bright lights are nontrespassory, but have been causing homeowners "loss of sleep and various adverse health consequences." Thus the lights have been interfering with the homeowners' use and enjoyment of their property. Since the homeowners have "complained," SuperStore has knowledge of the adverse effects, and the THE HOMEOWNERS MAY PURSUE AN ACTION IN INTENTIONAL TORT FOR PRIVATE NUISANCE AGAINST SUPERSTORE.
???51

Ned v Carl Assault
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 3
??Assault is placing another in reasonable apprehension of imminent harmful touching.
Here Ned and Carl got into an argument at a supermarket. Ned will argue that Carl assaulted him when he threw an orange at him. Ned will state that after a heated exchange and Carl raising his arm to throw the fruit that he was in apprehension of imminent harmful contact. This will prevail because the act of raising your arm to volitionally throw something towards someone will be sufficient to sustain a claim for assault.
Battery
Battery requires the intentional harmful offensive touching of another without consent or privilege.
Here we have Carl throwing an orange at Ned after an argument. This fulfills the elements required for a battery because when Carl raised his arm, it was a volitional movement to throw the item at Ned, which satisfies the intentional element. The harmful and offensive touching occurred when Carl threw the fruit at his body. The facts indicate that the fruit grazed his pants but this will be sufficient to constitute offensive touching. There was no consent as Ned did not ask Carl to throw the fruit. Carl will be liable for battery.
Defense Consent
Consent can be implied when one engages in harmful conduct with another. 52
???
Here Carl will argue that Ned consented to the harmful contact as he engaged in the argument and subsequent events that occurred. He will argue that his participation in the altercation will imply consent to the battery. This will likely not prevail as an argument.
Self Defense
Self defense is reasonable steps taken to prevent harm to oneself.
Here Carl will argue that he was acting in self defense as Ned was approaching him.
He will state that there had been a heated argument and Ned approached him as the initial aggressor and as such he had a reasonable belief he would be harmed. This may likely prevail as the fact indicate that it was a heated argument and a person approaching you as it escalates would cause a reasonable apprehension that self defense is necessary.
Carl v Ned Assault
Defined Supra. Here Carl will argue that Ned assaulted him as he took several steps toward him after they were arguing. Carl will argue that it was reasonable apprehension because they had just had a heated argument and he did not know Ned and when Ned took steps advancing upon him he was in reasonable apprehension of imminent harm. Carl will likely prevail in this argument and Ned will be liable for assault.
Battery
Defined Supra. Here the facts indicate that after Carl threw an orange at Ned, Ned punched him in the stomach. The elements for battery are met because it was intentional as punching someone in the stomach is a volitional act. This would be harmful and offensive touching because it would hurt and there would be no consent as
????53

he did not ask to be punched or indicate that he wanted to be punched. Ned will be liable for battery.
Defamation
Defamation requires a defamatory statement by D, of or concerning P, published to a third party who understands it to refer to P, and damage to the reputation. A defamatory remark is one that causes a person to be shunned, hated, loathed or avoided or causes injury to a person reputation.
Slander/Libel
A statement is slander if it is spoken and libel if it is printed. A statement is libel on its face or slander per se if it imputes a loathsome disease, a want of chastity, a crime of moral turpitude or is injurious to one's occupation. If the person defamed is a public figure and the matter is of public concern they must prove falsity and fault. If person is private figure and the matter is of private concern the P must prove fault and mere negligence.
Here Carl will bring an action against Ned for defamation. Carl will argue that the statement that he was a liar and a coward was defamatory and damaged his reputation. He will further argue that when he published it in the newspaper that he worked for, it was publicated to a third party and that he used his name and described the incident would cause others to understand that it was referred to him. Carl will argue that his business and reputation was damaged in this publication. Carl will argue that this statement is libel because it was printed and in a permanent form and widely read. He will further assert that this statement was libel on its face because Ned said he was a coward and a liar. Carl will argue that as a business consultant his customers expect honesty and to publicly call him a liar is deliberately injurious to his occupation. The courts may not determine that this is an "on its face" statement because Ned did not specifically state that he could not perform his occupation or was inept directly,
??54

therefore Carl will have to prove special damages and will not get presumed damages for a statement being libel on its face.
Fault
Fault requires proving malice. Malice is knowledge of falsity or entertaining serious doubts as to the truthfulness before publishing something.
Here Carl will argue that Ned was acting with malice as he was maliciously and recklessly printing the incident and calling him injurious names after the altercation. Carl will assert that he was negligent in printing the statement as he had a duty as a professional newsman to accurately report the news and not incidents that he embellished out of spite. Carl will prevail in this argument.
Damages
Carl will show that he was injured in his occupation as a result of Ned's negligent publication. He will show that his business has substantially declined as a result of the remarks made by Ned. Carl will be entitled to general damages that he can show as a result and possibly punitive damages as the statements were made negligently and maliciously.
Ned's Defense Battery/Assault
Self Defense-supra. Ned will argue that his use of force upon Carl was warranted as it occurred during a heated argument and he was in reasonable apprehension of being harmed by Carl. This will not prevail because Ned exceeded the scope of his defense by being the initial aggressor and using more force than was given. He will be liable for the assault and battery.
????55

Privileged Opinion
Ned will argue that his statements were opinion and as such he was entitled to make the statements. This will not prevail because opinions are actionable if they appear to be based on fact, as with the case here.
Homeowners v Supermarket Nuisance
Nuisance requires the interference with enjoyment or possession of property. Persons can seek public nuisance action or private nuisance action.
Public Nuisance
Public Nuisance requires a substantial interference with the enjoyment and possession of property by the community at large and the P suffered a particular type of injury that is different from the public.
The homeowners will bring a claim of public nuisance against the store as the bright lights are interfering with their sleep and causing health problems. Homeowners will argue that the use of lights is excessive and an unreasonable interference. This will likely not prevail as the courts will look to the utility of the harm verses the interference and determine that bright lights a few times a week is not a substantial interference. Further the homeowners could use room darkening shades to mitigate the effect of the lights. Further, Supermarket will argue that this claim is a claim shared by the public at large and there is not an individual claim that is distinct and therefore they are not liable. The courts will likely agree as it is in a matter of public safety to prevent harm to others and lights on occasionally at night are not unreasonable interference and there are not individual damages. Supermarket will not be liable for public nuisance.
????56

Private Nuisance
Private Nuisance requires a substantial and unreasonable interference with the right to enjoyment and possession of property in rightful possession and damages.
Here the homeowners will argue that the use of bright lights several times a week is harmful to their sleep and health. The store will counter that the lights are not substantial and unreasonable interference as it occurs occasionally and during the middle of the night and the gravity of the harm sought to be prevented, injury to customers or people on the premises is a greater utility than homeowners placing darkening shades on their windows. The courts will likely decide that this interference is not substantial enough to sustain a private nuisance claim.
Negligence
Negligence requires duty breach, actual cause and proximate cause and damages. Duty
A duty is owed to act as a reasonable person would in the same or similar situation. Under the Andrews view a duty is owed to all of society and under the Cardoza view a duty is owed to foreseeable P's in the zone of danger.
Here Homeowners will argue that a duty is owed to act as a reasonable neighbor and not create a harmful and interfering situation. Under the Andrews and Cardoza view, duty is met.
Breach
Breach is falling below the standard of care.
????57

Here Homeowner will argue that store fell below the standard of care when they shined the bright lights in their windows several times per week. Store will argue that the gravity of risk harm is not outweighed by the utility of keeping the lights on.
Actual Cause
Actual cause is established with the but for test. But for D's acts, the harm would not have occurred.
Homeowners will argue that but for the bright lights on several times nightly they would not be sleep deprived and have health problems.
Prox Cause
Prox cause requires D is liable for all foreseeable results of their conduct. Homeowners will argue that it is a foreseeable event that they would lose sleep over bright lights shined into their windows several times per week.
Damages
Damages are injuries suffered by breach of duty by D.
Here homeowners will argue that they suffered damages in loss of sleep and adverse health effects from the bright lights. Homeowners will likely prevail in their negligence claim against store as opposed to their nuisance claim and Store will be liable for their damages.
???58

Question 4
After dinner, Alvin felt ill. Although he thought he might have indigestion, he was short of breath and was experiencing chest pains, well-known symptoms of a heart attack. He drove himself to the emergency room at a local hospital.
At the emergency room, Alvin described his symptoms to Nick, an experienced screening nurse. Donna was the physician on duty. She had already worked a fourteen-hour shift and was eager to go home. Without examining Alvin, Donna concluded that he had indigestion, relying on Nick's statement of his symptoms. She sent him home, recommending that he take some bicarbonate of soda.
On the drive home, Alvin collapsed behind the wheel of his car. He veered into oncoming traffic, struck a truck, and died instantly. If Alvin had been examined by Donna, he would not have collapsed behind the wheel of his car.
With what crimes, if any, can Donna reasonably be charged? Discuss.
59

ANSWER A TO QUESTION 4
I. State vs. Donna
Did Donna's act result in a homicide of Alvin?
Homicide is an act of a human being that causes the death of another human. Here, the main issue will arise when determining whether Donna was the legal cause of Alvin's death.
Actual cause is determined by use of the but for test. But for Donna diagnosing Alvin "without examining Alvin," who was experiencing well-known symptoms of a heart attack, he would not have been released to drive himself home and collapse behind the wheel resulting in his death. Donna is the actual cause of Alvin's death.
Proximate/legal cause is determined where the accused in justly held liable for the results of the foreseeable injury her acts caused. Where the injury is a result of an independent unforeseeable act, then the accused may not be held to be the legal cause of the injury, but where the injury is dependent upon the accused acts or the intervening cause is foreseeable, the accused would most likely be the legal cause of the injury. Here, the facts state that "if Alvin had been examined by Donna, he would not have collapsed behind the wheel of his car," thus it can be inferred that the intervening heart attack was a foreseeable consequence of Donna's failure to examine Alvin therefore Donna is most likely the proximate/legal cause of Alvin's death due to his heart attack and collapse while driving himself home.
Also, Donna may also be considered to have a special relationship as a treating physician which would arguably create a duty to reasonably aid Alvin, and here Donna does not reasonably provide aid to Alvin because she had "already worked a fourteen- hour shift and was eager to go home, thus it can be inferred that Donna did not perform her duty to act, thus she is the legal cause of Alvin's death.
??60

Murder
Commonly, murder is the killing of a human being with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought is present when there are no facts to mitigate the crime to manslaughter, and there is the presence of at least one of the following mental states: Intent to kill, Intent to cause great bodily harm, reckless disregard for an unjustifiable and substantial risk to human life, and during commission of inherently dangerous felony.
Intent to Kill
The accused must exhibit an intention to kill the victim. Here, Donna does not have an intent to kill Alvin, thus this mental state would not be applicable.
Intent to Cause Bodily Harm
Here there are no facts present to indicate Donna possessed the intention to cause serious bodily harm on Alvin, thus this mental statement would not be applicable.
Reckless disregard
Here, the facts state that Donna, being eager to go home after a fourteen-hour shift, failed to examine Alvin before diagnosing Alvin and sending him home, thus it can be argued by the state that she reckless disregarded the potential for injury to Alvin.
Donna may argue that she relied on Nick, an experienced screening nurse's" explanation of the symptoms, in order to diagnose Alvin, however, the facts state that if Donna would have examined him, then he would not have collapsed, therefore it can be inferred that Donna recklessly disregarded a risk of injury to life that she should have known existed due to the well known symptoms of heart attack exhibited by Alvin including chest pains and short breath, therefore Donna would reasonably be charged with common law murder under a theory of reckless disregard for human life.
????61

First Degree Murder
First degree murder occurs where there is premeditation and deliberation done prior to the killing. Here, Donna does not intend to kill Alvin, so 1st degree murder would not apply.
Second Murder
All other killings that are not premeditated may be considered 2nd degree murder where there is the presence of malice. Here, Donna did not intend to kill Alvin, but she may have acted in a way that unreasonably and unjustifiably disregarded a known risk to human life. Here, if Donna would have examined him, then Alvin would not have collapsed, therefore it can be inferred that Donna recklessly disregarded a risk of injury to life therefore she would be reasonably charged with 2nd degree murder.
Manslaughter is the killing of a human being without malice aforethought, but with adequate provocation. Here, Donna was not provoked when she failed to examine Alvin, thus it can be inferred that Donna cannot be reasonably charged with manslaughter at common law.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is present where the accused acted intentionally and disregarded a risk to human life that she did not know was present, but should have known. Here, Donna did not commit an intentional act that caused Alvin's death, but she failed to examine Alvin which ultimately caused his death. The facts state that "if Alvin had been examined by Donna, he would not have collapsed behind the wheel of his car," thus it can be inferred that Donna, who is a physician, should have known by the symptoms described by Nick and her experience as a physician, that Alvin was possibly suffering from heart attack symptoms, and in the very least those symptoms required her to examine Alvin to make sure it was merely indigestion. The fact that Donna was eager to go home have caused her disregard for a risk of life that she
???62

should have known existed, thus it can be inferred that Donna may reasonably be charged with involuntary manslaughter.
63

STATE v. DONNA HOMICIDE
ANSWER B TO QUESTION 4
??Homicide is the unlawful killing of another, which includes murder and manslaughter. In this case, Alvin collapsed behind the wheel of his car and was killed after being examined and misdiagnosed by a physician, Donna. Therefore, we must examine the question of whether a homicide occurred in this case.
MURDER
Murder is the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought can be proven in one of four ways: (1) Intent to kill; (2) intent to inflict serious bodily injury; (3) an extremely reckless disregard for an unjustifiably high risk to human life; or (4) under the Felony Murder Doctrine. Here, the prosecution will argue that Donna displayed an extremely reckless disregard for an unjustifiably high risk to Alvin's life by failing to thoroughly examine him in the ER and then misdiagnosing him. Thus, Donna killed Alvin with malice aforethought.
Causation Actual
To sustain a conviction for murder or manslaughter, the prosecution must show that Alvin's death would not have occurred in the absence of Donna's conduct. Actual causation is determined through application of the "but for" test. Here, the prosecution will argue that Alvin's death would not have occurred but for Donna's failure to conduct a thorough examination of him and subsequent misdiagnosis of his condition. Therefore, the prosecution will successfully establish actual causation.
Proximate
????64

To sustain a conviction for murder or manslaughter, the prosecution must show that Alvin's death was foreseeable and that there was no intervening event which would break the chain of causation. In this regard, the prosecution will argue that it is foreseeable that Alvin's death would occur as a result of Donna's failure to conduct a thorough examination of him and subsequent misdiagnosis of his condition. Thus, proximate causation will be successfully established.
Affirmative Duty to Act
One has an affirmative duty to act if: (1) there is a special relationship between the parties; or (2) there is a contractual obligation to do so; or (3) there is a statutory requirement to do so; or (4) the defendant has voluntarily assumed the duty of plaintiff's care; or (5) the defendant has created the peril. In this case, the prosecution will argue that Donna was contractually obligated to perform a thorough examination of Alvin under a doctor-patient contract based on the fact that Alvin had entered the ER and Donna was the physician on duty at the time that Alvin entered the ER. Therefore, Donna had an affirmative duty to perform a thorough examination of Alvin. Her failure to do so constitutes an omission of her duty.
Felony Murder Doctrine
Under the Felony Murder Doctrine, a first degree murder charge is applied to any death which occurs during commission of or in the attempt of a dangerous felony (burglary, arson, rape, robbery and/or kidnapping). However, there is no evidence to indicate that Donna was committing or attempting any dangerous felony at the time of Alvin's death. As such, the Felony Murder Doctrine does not apply here.
First Degree Murder
First degree murder is the unlawful killing of another with premeditation and deliberation, and specific intent to kill. However, there is no evidence to indicate that
???65

Donna specifically intended to kill Alvin. Therefore, Donna may not properly be charged with first degree murder in this case.
Second Degree Murder
Second degree murder is the unlawful killing of another with a state of mind characterized as a wanton or an extremely reckless disregard for an unjustifiably high risk to human life. All murder other than first degree murder is second degree murder, which is a malice crime. Here, the prosecution will argue that Donna displayed an extremely reckless disregard for the high risk to Alvin's life by failing to conduct a thorough examination of him and by her subsequent misdiagnosis of his condition. As such, Donna may properly be charged with second degree murder.
Voluntary Manslaughter
Voluntary manslaughter is a killing that would be murder but for the existence of adequate provocation. Provocation is adequate only if: (1) it was a provocation that would arouse sudden and intense passions in the mind of an ordinary person causing him to lose self control; and (2) the defendant was in fact provoked; and (3) there was not adequate time between provocation and killing for the passions of a reasonable person to cool; and (4) the defendant in fact did not cool off between provocation and killing. However, there is no evidence to indicate the existence of adequate provocation in this case.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is an unintentional killing which occurs as a result of defendant's gross criminal negligence or during commission of a misdemeanor (under the Misdemeanor Manslaughter Rule). Alvin's death did not occur during commission of a misdemeanor by Donna.
???66

Criminal Negligence
However, the defense may argue that Alvin's death was unintentional and that Donna displayed a conscious disregard for a substantial and unjustifiable risk to Alvin's life. Further, Donna's state of mind was insufficiently wanton to sustain a conviction for second degree murder. A Trier of fact will likely agree with this argument and, as a result, the defense will be successful in mitigating Donna's murder charge to involuntary manslaughter.
DEFENSES
There are no viable defenses available to Donna. CONCLUSION
Donna is guilty of involuntary manslaughter.
???67


C. CONVERSIONC. CONVERSION??Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2012
1
California First-Year Law Students' Examination

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2012 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the October 2012 California First- Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on page ii.
Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject Page Torts 4
Criminal Law 19 Contracts 31
???Torts
42
2

October 23, 2012
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all four (4) questions. Time allotted: 4 hours
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer the questions according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?3

Question 1
Patricia hired Contractor to build an addition to her home. During excavation, a safety inspector determined that the excavation violated statutory standards intended to protect workers from cave-ins. In response, Foreman shut down the work site.
Foreman stepped away from the work site to call his wife. Just then Stephen, who was Patricia's ten-year-old son, came home from school and climbed into the excavated hole. As he reached the bottom, he screamed as soil caved in around him and he was buried. Hearing the scream, Foreman grabbed a shovel, jumped into the hole, freed Stephen after several minutes of shoveling, found that his heart had stopped, and applied chest compressions to resuscitate him.
Stephen suffered a sprained ankle as a result of the cave-in and broken ribs as a result of the chest compressions.
1. What claims, if any, can Patricia reasonably bring on Stephen's behalf against Contractor? Discuss.
2. What claims, if any, can Patricia reasonably bring on Stephen's behalf against Foreman? Discuss..
4

I. Patricia v Contractor
Answer A to Question 1
?In order for Patricia to assert a claim against Contractor she must be able to show that he was either responsible for Foreman or Contractor failed to perform in a reasonable manner.
A. Respondeat Superior
An employer can be held vicariously liable for the acts of their employees when they act negligently and a harm is caused or when their act is intentional but it must be in furtherance of the employer's purpose. Here, in order for Patricia to bring a reasonable suit against Contractor she must be able to show that Foreman was an employee of Contractor and that Foreman was negligent.
In this case, Foreman worked for Contractor. There are no facts to indicate that Foreman was an independent contractor. Contractor left him in charge of the construction site which included the authority to shut down the work site and make other decisions in regards to the work being performed. As such, Foreman would be considered an employee of Contractor. If Patricia can assert that Foreman was negligent, as discussed below, she will be able to assert a claim against Contractor for vicarious liability for the damages suffered by Stephen and recover from Contractor.
B. Negligence. Patricia can also assert a direct claim against Contractor for negligence. When one takes an affirmative act and fails to act as a reasonable person and a harm results they can be held liable as being negligent. In order to assert her claim she must show that there was a duty, that duty was breached, the harm caused was a result of the breach, damages were suffered and there are no defenses.
1. Duty. When one takes an affirmative act they owe a duty of reasonable care to all foreseeable plaintiffs. Here, Contractor was hired to build an addition to Patricia's home. As such, when he began the excavation he began an act that required him to act with
???5

due care to prevent any injuries that may occur as a result of the construction. Contractor may argue that Stephen was not a foreseeable plaintiff. Under the majority view it is held that a duty of reasonable care is owed to all plaintiffs in the foreseeable zone of danger. Contractor may argue that Stephen was not in the foreseeable zone of danger; however, even though he was at school the excavation was occurring at his house, and as such it is foreseeable that he would be present at some time during the construction as construction of a room addition cannot occur within one day of beginning to completion. Therefore, Stephen would have been in the foreseeable zone of danger and was owed a duty of reasonable care. Under the minority view a duty is owed to all. Under either view, Contractor by beginning the construction owed a duty of care to Stephen.
2. Breach of Duty. When one owes a duty of care, the breach of such duty must be shown in order to show that there was negligence. Here, there are two theories under which Patricia can try to establish that Contractor breached his duty.
a. Negligence per se - When there is a statute in place, that statute can be used to set the duty and if that statute is not followed can be used to show that the duty was breached. In order to show this Patricia must show that the statute was in place to prevent the type of harm that was suffered, and that the plaintiff was in the class of people the statute was designed to protect.
Here, that standard was intended to protect workers from cave-ins. Since the statute was in place to protect from cave-ins, which is what occurred, it was specifically instituted to protect from this type of harm. However, it was specifically put into place to protect workers, which is the class of plaintiff it is designed to protect. Since Stephen was her son, he is not a worker, he is not in the type of class of people the statute was designed to protect; therefore Patricia would be unable to prove breach through the use of the statute.
??6

b. Reasonable standard. When one is shown to have acted unreasonably then they have breached their duty. Unreasonableness can be shown when the burden of avoiding the harm causing activity paired with the social utility of that activity is less than the likelihood that the harm will occur and the gravity of the harm suffered.
Here, Contractor left his employee, Foreman, in charge of the excavation. However, his duty was to ensure that his plans were such that did not pose a risk to either his employees or the people that may be nearby the construction site. Being a contractor, he should be knowledgeable to the statutes within the area and adjust his plans accordingly. As such, since it would take Contractor very little to be knowledgeable of the accepted practices within the industry, as he has been in this industry, he owed a duty of care and reasonable conduct to ensure that his construction sites were safe, especially since he left other employees in charge of the sites. If he can show that Foreman acted outside of his scope and therefore did not comply with his instructions then he can show that he did not act unreasonably and there was no breach of duty. However, if it is found that Contractor should have known of the risk and did not instill practices to prevent harm, such as here, setting up an excavation that is clearly against statute, then he acted unreasonably and breached his duty of care.
c. Causation. In order for there to be an appropriate cause of action Patricia must show that Contractor's breach of duty was both the cause-in-fact of Stephen's injuries and the proximate cause.
i. Cause-in-fact can be shown here through the but-for test.
Here, but for the Contractor failing to comply with statute and conduct a reasonable excavation that was safe, the hole would not have been in the yard and Stephen would not have been able to climb into it and the cave-in would not have occurred.
ii. Proximate cause. When there is a foreseeable, intervening and superseding event that breaks the chain of causation then the person will not be liable for the harm that was caused.
????7

Here, Contractor will argue that there was. It is apparent that there was an intervening superseding event; when Foreman shut down the excavation, he left the hole unattended. This occurred after Contractor's breach of duty, which was the improper excavation site. However, the question is whether or not this was a foreseeable event that occurred. Normally a person will not be held liable for the tortious acts of a third person; however, negligence on the part of another person is foreseeable. Therefore, if it can be shown that Foreman was negligent, as discussed below, then Contractor will not be able to argue that he was not the proximate cause of the injury and Patricia will be able to prove this element.
d. Damages. Damages must be proven in order to be able to recover in a negligence action. Damages must be legally cognizable. Here, Patricia will be able to meet this burden since she will be able to show that Stephen suffered a sprained ankle and broken ribs.
e. Defenses. Under the common law, if a party was contributorily negligent they were barred from any recovery. However under the modern majority the theory of comparative negligence will be applied and the plaintiff's recovery will be reduced by the percentage of their fault. Depending on the jurisdiction, it will depend on whether they will receive recovery no matter the percentage of their fault or if they will be barred if they are determined to be more at fault than the defendant.
Here, Contractor will assert that Stephen was negligent when he decided to climb into an excavated home in a construction area since it is unreasonable to do so. However, Patricia can assert that Stephen should be held to the standard of a child and not an adult, so he should be judged as a child of like age, experience and education and as a 10-year old, he was not aware of the risk associated with the hole. A 10-year old boy normally enjoys digging holes, climbing into them and exploring. As such, if he is judged on the child standard, he will not be determined to have been negligent and Patricia will be able to recover no matter the jurisdiction.
??8

II. Patricia v Foreman
A. Negligence. supra.
1. Duty. supra. Here, Patricia will be able to assert the same standard of care to meet the duty. He took an affirmative act and therefore owed a reasonable duty of care.
a. Professional Standard. One with special skills or knowledge will be held to the standard of care of someone with those same skills and knowledge, not the reasonable person standard.
Here, Patricia can also assert that since Foreman was left in charge of the site he had special knowledge and skills about construction sites and the dangers they pose to people not familiar with the industry; therefore he should be held to the standard of a professional with those knowledge and skills.
Under either theory Patricia can assert that there was a duty owed.
2. Breach. supra
Here, Foreman had shut down the work site; however he had stepped away from the work site to make a phone call to his wife when the injury occurred. Foreman will assert that no one was home when he stepped away from the work site to make the call, therefore there was no likelihood that any harm would occur and he was not unreasonable just to be able to make a call since Stephen had just come home from school. However, since he was aware by the statute that the excavation site could cave in which could result in serious harm or death, when he left it unattended, it was possible for someone he was unaware of to enter the hole, as what happened here when Stephen entered the hole. He could have merely made his phone call by the site, or left it attended by someone or placed a barrier or warning up to stop people from entering the whole. This would have required very little effort on his part, and by the use of a barrier or warning or being present he could have easily prevented Stephen from entering the hole. Since he did not have a large burden on him to take a different course
???9

of action and the gravity of the harm outweighs this burden he acted unreasonably and therefore breached his duty of care.
3. Causation - supra
a. Cause-in-fact. Here, this is clear, but for Foreman stepping away from the hole,
Stephen would not have climbed into the hole and had the dirt cave in on him.
b. Proximate cause supra
Here, there were no events between Foreman leaving the hole unattended and Stephen climbing in and being injured; therefore he was also the proximate cause of the injury.
Patricia will be able to show causation.
4. Damages - supra. Patricia will be able to assert the damages as discussed above.
5. Defenses - supra
Here, Foreman can assert the same defenses as Contractor and will either be successful or not as discussed above.
B. Battery is the intentional act causing a harmful contact.
1. Intentional act - When one acts with the intent to cause a contact they have acted with intent. Here, it is clear that Foreman intended to make contact with Stephen. He pulled Stephen out of the hole and applied chest compressions. Therefore his action was intentional.
????????10

2. Harmful contact. A contact is harmful if it causes injury. Here, the chest compressions that Foreman performed caused Stephen to suffer broken ribs. He clearly suffered an injury; therefore there was a harmful contact.
3. Consent. When a contact has been consented to, the defendant will not be held liable for the damages that were caused. Consent can be implied where it is a situation in which the plaintiff would have normally consented to the touching; however is unable to either because they are unconscious or something else prevents them from giving such consent.
Here, Stephen was unconscious and his heart had stopped. Foreman acted by giving chest compressions to get his heart started again. In such an emergency situation, where the plaintiff is unable to give consent but it is such a situation that normally the reasonable person would give the consent, it is implied that consent was given. Since this is such a situation, Foreman will be able to assert that he was given implied consent and therefore will not be liable for the battery.
??11

Answer B to Question 1 1. PATRICIA V. CONTRACTOR
Negligence - In order to prove a prima facie case of negligence, plaintiff must show that defendant had a duty to plaintiff, that defendant breached that duty, that defendant was the actual and proximate cause of plaintiff's injuries, and that plaintiff had damages.
Duty - Every person owes a duty of a reasonable prudent person to avoid risk of injury to other people.
Here, Patricia is bringing claims against Contractor on behalf of her 10-year old son, Stephen. Patricia will contend that Contractor owed a duty to Stephen, and the public in general, of a reasonably prudent contractor to keep the job site safe.
Contractor will argue that he did not owe a duty to Stephen since Stephen should not have been in the excavated hole.
A court will side with Patricia and find that Contract did in fact owe a duty to Stephen.
Breach - In order to prove negligence, the plaintiff must show that defendant failed to fulfill his obligations under his duty.
Here, Patricia will argue that Contractor breached his duty by violating the statutory standards intended to protect workers from cave-ins. See Negligence Per Se below.
Negligence Per Se - Where plaintiff violates a statute intended to protect someone in the same class as plaintiff, and designed to protect against the same harm as that caused to plaintiff, the violation of the statute will be proof of a duty and a breach of the duty in regards to negligence.
?????12

Here, Contractor violated statutory standards intended to protect workers from cave- ins. Patricia will argue that the statute was designed to protect against the exact type of harm from which Stephen suffered, which is harm caused by a cave-in. She will also argue that, although Stephen may not have been in the class of persons for which the statute was designed to protect -- i.e., workers -- it was foreseeable that someone other than a worker could have been injured by a cave-in and that the statute should be construed as to protect the general public, as well as workers.
Contractor, on the other hand, will argue that Stephen is not a member of the class designed to be protected, i.e., workers. As such, he will argue that that element of negligence per se is not satisfied.
A court will side with plaintiff and hold that, although Stephen is not a member of the class specifically mentioned in the statute, it is foreseeable that a member of the public could also be hurt by the violation of the statute; and that, as such, the statute should be construed to include members of the public as well as workers.
Actual Cause - In order to prove actual cause, plaintiff must prove that defendant was the "but for" cause of defendant's injuries.
Here, Patricia will argue that but for the fact that Contractor breached his duty to Stephen by violating the statutory standards, the soil would not have caved in around Stephen and he would not have been buried.
A court will agree with Patricia and hold that the Contract is the actual "but for" cause of Stephen's injuries.
Proximate Cause - In order to prove proximate cause, plaintiff must prove that plaintiff's injuries were a foreseeable result of defendant's breach.
??13

Here, Patricia will argue that it was foreseeable that a child might climb into the excavated hole. She will also argue that it is foreseeable that by breaching the standard of care by violating the statutory standards, that the child may be buried in the hole.
Contractor, on the other hand, will argue that it is not foreseeable that a child would climb into an excavated hole at a construction work site; and that, as such, he was not the proximate cause of Stephen's injuries.
A court will side with Patricia and hold that Contractor was the proximate cause of Stephen's injuries.
Damages - In order to prove a prima face case of negligence, the plaintiff must prove that he has damages.
Here, Patricia will argue that Stephen suffered damages because his heart had stopped when he was buried in the hole. In addition, she will argue that he suffered a sprained ankle as a result of the cave-in and broken ribs as a result of the chest compressions applied by Foreman.
Contractor, on the other hand, will argue that the broken ribs were not a direct result of the cave-in, but were an intervening event caused by Foreman. As such, Contractor will argue that he should not be liable for Stephen's broken ribs.
Patricia will counter-argue that it is foreseeable that someone will attempt to rescue a child in distress. As such, she will argue Contractor should be liable for all of Stephen's injuries.
A court will side with Patricia and hold that Contractor is liable for all of Stephen's injuries. As such, Contractor will be held liable for Stephen's economic and non- economic injuries, including physician bills and pain and suffering.
?14

Strict Liability - A person will be held strictly liable when he is involved in an inherently dangerous activity. An activity is inherently dangerous when the risk of danger is great, the activity cannot be done without the risk of danger even with the exercise of due care, and where the activity is not common to the area.
Here, Patricia will argue that excavating is an inherently dangerous activity. She will contend that the risk of danger of cave-ins is great. She will further contend that the activity cannot be done without the risk of danger even with the exercise of due care, because there is always a risk of cave-ins, as evidenced by the fact that a statute was enacted in order to protect workers from cave-ins. She will also argue that excavation is not common to her area.
Contractor, on the other hand, will argue that excavating is not an inherently dangerous activity. He will argue that the risk of cave-ins in fact is not great, and that the activity can be done without the risk of danger when due care is exercised. He will also argue that excavation is common to residential areas when people build additions to their home.
A court will side with contractor and hold that excavation is not an inherently dangerous activity. As such, the court will find that contractor will not be strictly liable.
Vicarious Liability - An employer will be held liable for the torts of its employee under the doctrine of respondeat superior.
Here, assuming Foreman is an employee of Contractor's, and not an independent contractor, Contractor can be held liable for all of the torts of Foreman committed against Stephen.
Conclusion - Patricia can reasonably bring a claim of negligence on Stephen's behalf against Contractor based on negligence per se. In addition, she can bring a claim for negligence against Contractor for the torts of Foreman under the doctrine of respondeat
???15

superior. She may try to bring a claim of strict liability for an inherently dangerous activity, but it most likely will not succeed.
2. PATRICIA V. FOREMAN Negligence - See rule, above.
Duty - See rule, above.
Here, Foreman had a duty to the public at large to behave as a reasonably prudent person would under the circumstances. As such, Foreman had a duty to Stephen.
A court will agree that Foreman had a duty to Stephen.
Breach - See rule, above.
Here, Patricia will argue that by stepping away from the work site to call his wife, the Contractor breached his duty to the public in general and to Stephen in particular to avoid risk of injury. She will argue that since he knew that the site had failed a safety inspection relating to cave-ins, he should have had someone on duty guarding against someone climbing into the excavated hole when he stepped away to call his wife.
Actual Cause - See rule, above.
Here, Patricia will argue that but for the fact that Foreman stepped away to call his wife, Stephen would not have climbed into the excavated hole and been injured. In addition, she will argue that but for the fact that Foreman applied chest compressions to Stephen, Stephen would not have suffered broken ribs.
The Foreman, on the other hand, will argue that it is not possible to predict whether or not Stephen would have climbed into the excavated hole and been injured if he had not stepped away to call his wife. It is possible that Stephen may have disregarded Foreman's presence, and would have still climbed into the excavated hole and been injured. He will also argue that he was attempting to save Stephen's life, which in fact
?????16

he did, which is why he applied chest compressions to Stephen and accidentally broke his ribs.
A court will side with Patricia and hold that Foreman is the actual cause of Stephen's injuries.
Proximate Cause - See rule, above.
Here, Patricia will argue that it was foreseeable that if Foreman stepped away from the excavation site, that a child would climb into the site and be injured.
Foreman, on the other hand, will argue that it is not foreseeable that a child would climb into an excavation site, since children should be monitored by their parents and not be allowed to go near excavation sites.
A court will side with Patricia and hold that Foreman is the proximate cause of Stephen's injuries.
Rescuer - A person has no duty to help out another person, absent a special relationship.
Here, Foreman had no special relationship with Stephen. As such, he had no duty to rescue him. However, since Foreman volunteered to attempt to rescue Stephen, Foreman is responsible for any injuries caused by such rescue in the absence of a Good Samaritan law in the jurisdiction.
Damages - See rule, above.
Here, Stephen suffered when his heart stopped. In addition, he suffered a sprained
ankle as a result of the cave-in and broken ribs as a result of the chest compressions.
???17

A court will find that Foreman is liable for all of Stephen's injuries, unless there is a Good Samaritan law enacted in his jurisdiction, in which case Foreman will not be held liable for the broken ribs caused by the chest compressions.
Strict Liability - See rule and analysis, above.
Conclusion - Patricia can reasonably bring a claim on Stephen's behalf against Foreman for negligence. She may try to bring a claim against Foreman for strict liability; however, it most likely will not be successful.
??18

Question 2
Ann was owed $500 by Victor, a former boyfriend, who refused to pay her. She knew that he kept a large amount of cash at his house. She drove there late one night with a pistol tucked in her waistband to scare him into paying her.
When Ann arrived at Victor's house and rang the bell, he refused to let her in. She went around to the back of the house, broke a window in the back door, and let herself in. She confronted him in the living room and demanded the $500.
Victor took $500 from a desk drawer and crossed the room to Ann. But instead of handing her the money, he grabbed the gun from her waistband and pushed her away from him. He pointed the gun at her and said, "I think I will just shoot you and get you out of my hair permanently." He did not intend to shoot her, only to scare her.
Ann was frightened and lunged at Victor's arm. In the ensuing struggle, the gun fired, killing Victor. Ann picked up the $500 and left. As she was speeding away, she struck and injured a bicyclist.
With what crimes, if any, can Ann reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can she reasonably assert? Discuss.
19

Answer A to Question 2 (1) For What Crimes Can Ann Reasonably Be Charged
(A) Burglary
Burglary, at common law, required the following elements: (1) a breaking; (2) and entry; (3) of a dwelling; (4) of another; (5) at night; (6) with the intent to commit a felony therein. The elements of breaking and entry was satisfied when Ann broke a window in the back door and entered the building. The building she entered was a dwelling (house) and it was not hers, it was possessed by Victor, therefore satisfying the third and fourth elements. It is stated that this occurred at night, satisfying the fifth element, and so all that is remaining is that she entered to commit a felony, in this case robbery (see below). Therefore, she can reasonably be charged with burglary.
Modern statutory changes to burglary often remove the requirement of breaking, expand the types of buildings that it applies to, and no longer requires that the offense occurs at night. However, since this merely expands potential liability, the fact that all the common law elements are met means that she would still be liable regardless of whether the jurisdiction where this incident occurred had adopted modern changes or not. Burglary is a felony.
(B) Robbery / Attempted Robbery / Aggravated Robbery
Robbery, at common law, required the following elements: (1) obtaining possession; (2) of personal property; (3) by way of intimidation or force; (4) from another's person or presence; (5) with the intent to permanently deprive him of it. Ann obtained possession of $500 from Victor's home, satisfying the first two elements. While she attempted to use intimidation, she eventually succeeded by way of force, satisfying the third element. Victor was certainly alive at the start of the robbery, and regardless of whether he technically died before or after he died should make little difference because it appears to all have been in a matter of minutes. Considering that he died from her force and she immediately took the $500, the fourth element should be met. She did not intend to return the $500, so the prosecution can contend that she intended to permanently
???20

deprive him, therefore meeting the fifth element. Therefore she can reasonably be charged with robbery.
In the event that she claims self-defense with regard to the actual shooting and that she did not use force to obtain the money (and the intimidation did not accomplish obtaining the money either) she could be charged with attempted robbery, because she intended to use intimidation to obtain the money.
Some jurisdictions have the crime of aggravated robbery which includes robbery with a deadly weapon. If this jurisdiction is such, Ann would be charged with aggravated robbery.
(C) First Degree Felony Murder / Homicide
At common law murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought. When a killing occurs during the commission of a felony implied malice will be found and the defendant can be charged with felony murder. One requirement is that the death must be a foreseeable result of the commission of the felony. A death that occurs in the course of a robbery will be found to be foreseeable, especially when the defendant uses a deadly weapon to accomplish the robbery.
At common law there were only a small number of enumerated felonies, any of which could serve for felony murder. Modern jurisdictions have many more felonies than at common law and only certain felonies will result in first-degree felony murder (others will result in second-degree felony murder). Jurisdictions following the Model Penal Code include kidnapping, robbery, burglary, arson, and rape. If the jurisdiction in which this occurred follows modern changes Ann could reasonably be charged with first-degree felony murder. Regardless she can be reasonably charged with murder.
Ann might also be charged with some other form of homicide. She may be charged with murder, depending on who pulled the trigger. It is unclear how the trigger went off in the "ensuing struggle" but if she pulled the trigger she may be charged with murder. Using a
?21

deadly weapon allows a permissive inference of intent to kill (malice aforethought). Even if she did not pull the trigger, she could reasonably be charged with involuntary manslaughter, because she could be found to have caused a death through criminal negligence or recklessness.
(D) Battery
The elements of battery are: (1) the unlawful application of physical force; (2) to another; (3) resulting in harmful or offensive contact. Ann struck a bicyclist while speeding away from Victor's house. It is unclear whether this collision was accidental or intentional. If it was intentional, then all the elements are met--unlawful physical force was applied to the bicyclist resulting in harm while accompanied with the necessary mens rea of general intent. Even if the contact was accidental, it may be found to have been unlawful because Ann was fleeing from the scene of a felony (assuming one was committed) and had not yet reached a place of temporary safety.
(E) Larceny
At common law the elements of larceny are: (1) a taking; (2) and carrying away (asportation); (3) of property; (4) of another; (5) with intent to permanently deprive them of it. Larceny could be charged against Ann in the event that Victor's death prevents the charge of robbery. If robbery cannot be charged, then Ann committed larceny when she took the $500 from his house and carried it away with the intent to permanently keep it for herself. Even if this property no longer belonged to Victor because he was dead, it did belong to someone else (next of kin) and did not, according to the prosecution, belong to Ann. Note however, that Ann cannot be convicted of both robbery and larceny, as that would be double jeopardy. She can reasonably be charged with both, but the jury can only find her guilty of one at most.
(F) Merger
At common law, misdemeanors committed in the same act as a felony merged into the felony. Depending on how the situation is viewed, it's possible the battery could merge with one of the other felonies. Modern changes no longer follow this rule, so the
???22

jurisdiction that she is charged in will determine how this plays out. However, when a person is convicted of felony murder, the underlying felony merges with the felony murder. Therefore, if Ann is convicted of felony murder, the underlying felony (burglary, robbery) will merge with it and she can only be convicted of the felony murder.
Additionally, a lesser included offense merges with a greater offense. If Ann were convicted of felony murder she could not also be convicted of another form of criminal homicide. If she is convicted of aggravated robbery she cannot also be convicted of robbery.
(2) Ann's Defenses
(A) Defense to Burglary
Ann's best defense to burglary is that she did not intend to commit a felony in the house of Victor. Burglary is a specific intent crime which means that Ann must have held the specific intention to commit a felony in his home when it was combined with her act of breaking and entry. Ann will argue that because the $500 rightfully was hers, she was not breaking in to commit robbery. Regardless of whether she did or did not commit robbery, she did not believe she was committing robbery, and therefore she did not have the requisite intent when breaking into the house.
(B) Defense to Robbery
Ann's first defense to robbery is similar to her defense for burglary. She will argue that because the $500 rightfully belonged to her, she had no intention to permanently dispossess Victor of any of his property. This is difficult though, because what she was seeking to reclaim, money, is fungible. She had no way of knowing that the $500 she took was her $500. Courts will generally disallow a defense for recovery of fungible items. However, she still will argue that she lacked the intent to permanently deprive him. Because she did not intend to permanently deprive him, she may be able to negate the intent element of robbery.
???23

(C) Defense to First Degree Felony Murder / Homicide
Her best defense to felony murder is that she did not commit the underlying felony of burglary or robbery. With regard to another form of homicide that she could be charged with, her best defense is that she was justified in acting in self-defense. While she was the initial aggressor, she is able to regain her right to self-defense if the other party suddenly escalates the confrontation.
If Victor had pulled out his own gun and she had shot him first, she probably would not be able to claim self-defense. However, because Victor disarmed her and turned her own gun at her while stating an intent to kill her, she was justified in using self-defense. Victor was only allowed to use necessary force in his own self-defense and shooting her once she no longer posed a threat went beyond that. By stating that he was going to shoot her, while having the apparent ability to do so (point the gun), that allowed Ann to regain her right of self-defense and to attempt to take the gun back in order to preserve her own life.
(D) Defense to Battery
Her best defense to battery is that she lacked the necessary intent. Battery requires general intent which is that the actor knew that they were acting in the proscribed way and was aware of all attendant circumstances. She was aware she was speeding, but was probably unaware of the bicyclist until it was too late to avoid her. Speeding could be viewed as negligent or reckless. If it is viewed as recklessness, it must represent a gross deviation of a risk that a similarly situated person would take given the purpose of their conduct. Her purpose--fleeing the scene--would not be an acceptable purpose.
If it is viewed as negligent, it must be criminally negligent which requires a higher degree of fault than criminal negligence. Her ignorance of the risk must have been a gross deviation from what a normal person in her position would realize. Since many people speed, it could be argued that this is not a gross deviation, and fails to rise to the level of criminal negligence or criminal recklessness.
??24

State v. Ann
Burglary
Answer B to Question 2
??Under common law, burglary is the breaking and entering of the dwelling house of another in the nighttime with intent to commit a felony or larceny therein.
Here, Ann arrived at Victor's house intending to scare him into paying her $500. When Victor refused to let her inside the house, she broke a window in the back door and let herself in. This is sufficient to constitute a breaking and entering by Ann. Also, the facts indicate that the home belonged to Victor; therefore, it was the dwelling of another, Additionally, the incident occurred at a time when Ann drove to Victor's house in the nighttime; thus the nighttime requirement is satisfied. Furthermore, prior to Ann arriving at Victor's home, Ann formulated the plan to drive to Victor's house with a pistol in order to scare him into paying her $500.
However, Ann will argue that because Victor owed her $500, she was simply trying to recover what was hers to begin with. The State will counter-argue by stating that the particular money that he had inside his house was not the money that he was going to use Ann to pay her back.
Thus, unless Ann can prove that the money was her owned property, then she would be guilty of a burglary.
Under modern law, burglary is the entering of any structure with the intent to commit a felony or larceny therein.
Here, Ann will be found guilty under modern law burglary as discussed above under common law absent any defense such as the $500 being her actual property.
25

Thus, Ann will be guilty of burglary under modern law.
Homicide
A homicide is a killing of a human being by another human being
Causation
The State will have to establish that Victor's death was actually and proximately caused by Ann.
Actual Cause
Here, "but-for" Ann lunging towards Victor's arm as he held a gun, the gun would not have fired, killing Victor.
Proximate Cause
Here, the State will show that pistols are intended to be fired using bullets and bullets are intended to strike certain things or persons. Therefore, if Ann struggled with Victor as he held a gun, it was foreseeable that the gun would go off seriously injuring somebody or even killing them.
Thus, Ann was the actual and proximate cause of Victor's death.
Murder
A murder is a the killing of a human being with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought is when the defendant has an endangering state of mind evidenced by one of the following intentions: specific intent, serious bodily harm, depraved heart, or the felony murder rule.
Here, the State will contend because the killing of Victor occurred during the commission of an inherently dangerous crime, burglary, the felony murder rule should be applied to imply malice.
?????26

Felony Murder Rule
Under the felony murder to apply, the killing of a human being must have occurred during the commission of an inherently dangerous crime such as burglary, arson, rape, robbery, kidnapping, or mayhem.
Here, there was a burglary because Ann broke into Victor's home for the purpose of taking $500 from him. However, Ann will argue that the $500 was owed to her; therefore, making it her property. The State will have to prove that the money was not in fact Ann's, but belonged to Victor because it was likely that money Victor had in his possession was not money he was intending to use to pay Ann.
Thus, the felony murder will imply malice.
1st Degree Murder
First-degree murder is the killing of another that is willful, premeditated, and deliberate. Also, the felony murder rule will also make the killing of a human being a murder in the first degree.
Here, with the application of the felony murder rule, the killing of Victor was a killing in the first degree.
Thus, there was a killing in the first degree.
Voluntary Manslaughter
Voluntary manslaughter is the killing of a human being without malice aforethought because of adequate provocation. Adequate provocation is provocation which would cause a reasonable person to lose his normal self-control, causing him to kill another person during an insufficient cooling off period.
Here, there are no facts that would indicate there was adequate provocation to reduce murder to voluntary manslaughter.
???27

Thus, voluntary manslaughter will not apply.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is the killing of a human being without malice aforethought but because of criminal negligence.
Here, Ann will argue to have murder lessened to involuntary manslaughter because she negligently brought a pistol into Victor's home, which accidently went off, killing Victor during a struggle.
However, the State will argue that because of the application of the felony murder rule, involuntary manslaughter is not applicable.
Thus, involuntary manslaughter will not apply.
Larceny
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away the personal property of another within intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
Here, the State will argue that the $500 Ann picked up was a trespassory taking of Victor's money. Also, when she left Victor's house with the $500 it was sufficient to fulfill the carrying away element. Additionally, because the money did in fact belong to Victor because it was in his possession, the $500 did not belong to Ann, but was the property of another. Furthermore, Ann entered Victor's home for the purpose of taking back $500 that Victor owed her; therefore, she had intent to permanently deprive Victor of his money.
Thus, Ann is guilty of larceny.
Robbery
A robbery is larceny (Supra) done with force, fear, or intimidation.
???28

Here, because Victor was already dead when Ann actually took possession of Victor's $500, there was no force, fear, or intimidation at that time.
Thus, Ann is not guilty of robbery.
Battery
A battery is the unlawful application of force.
Here, Ann may be guilty of injuring a bicyclist when she struck him as she sped aware from Victor's house. The State will just have to prove that the bicyclist was injured while Ann was driving in an unsafe manner, which caused her to hit bicyclist..
Thus, Ann is guilty for battery.
Ann's Defenses
Self-Defense
Self-defense is when a person may reasonably believes himself to be threatened by imminent bodily harm may use whatever degree of force is apparently necessary to protect himself.
Here, Ann will argue when Victor took Ann's gun from her waistband, pointed it at her, and threatened to shoot her, Ann will state that her actions were necessary to protect herself from death because should reasonably believed that Victor would carry out the act of killing her. However, the State will argue that Victor did not intend to kill her, but to only scare her. Nonetheless, the application of the felony murder rule will not allow a defense of self-defense because Ann killed Victor during the commission of a burglary, which triggered the felony murder rule.
???29

Imperfect Self-Defense
Here, Ann will argue that although her belief to take action when Victor pointed a gun at her may have been unreasonable, she would state this the defense of imperfect self- defense should mitigate her killing of Victor to voluntary manslaughter because she believed her actions were necessary to protect herself.
Thus, imperfect self-defense will fail because of the felony murder rule.
?30

Question 3
Sam decided to sell his interior design business in Town to Betty. While reviewing a purchase agreement drafted by Sam, Betty insisted on a covenant by Sam not to compete with her in the interior design business in Town for a period of two years. In response, Sam drafted the following proposed language on the last page of the purchase agreement:
"Sam hereby agrees that he will not perform interior design services in Town for a period of two years."
Betty said: "That's fine. I don't want to have to compete with your ties to your former clients in Town." Sam told Betty that he would revise the purchase agreement accordingly.
The following day, Sam sent Betty the original and one copy of the purchase agreement. Betty signed the original without reading it and returned it to Sam along with payment of the purchase price; she kept the copy. Sam never signed the purchase agreement.
Six months later, Betty learned that Sam had recently undertaken four large interior design jobs for clients who lived in Town. When she complained, he explained that, although the clients lived in Town, the jobs were on properties located outside Town. She reviewed her copy of the purchase agreement and discovered that it did not contain a covenant by him not to compete. Sam had mistakenly sent her an unrevised version of the purchase agreement.
1. Does the purchase agreement contain a covenant by Sam not to compete? Discuss. 2. Is the purchase agreement enforceable? Discuss.
3. Assuming the purchase agreement contains a covenant by Sam not to compete and is enforceable, did Sam violate the covenant? Discuss.
31

Answer A to Question 3
Is the Non-compete clause incorporated into the agreement? This is a contract for services; therefore the common law applies.
Does a contract exist?
A contract formed through mutual assent supported by consideration.
Mutual assent?
Mutual assent is formed by offer and acceptance
Offer made?
An offer is made by manifesting an intent to be bound to the material terms.
Sam drafted a purchase agreement; this is sufficient to show that he intended to be bound. However the terms were not acceptable as Betty insisted on the inclusion of a new term. Under common law the request for the addition of the term was a rejection.
Sam then sent the proposed language for the non-compete covenant which Betty assented to. Sam then sent a contract to Betty which she signed. This is sufficient to be considered an offer as Sam intended to be bound by the terms of the purchase agreement
Acceptance Made?
Acceptance is manifesting assent to the terms of the offeror communicated in an effective means.
Here it is clear that the offer was communicated in an effective way and that Betty clearly intended to be bound by the contract.
???32

Supported by Consideration?
Consideration is shown by a bargained-for exchange.
In this case Sam was bargaining for money and Betty was bargaining for Sam's business.
This contract is supported by consideration and mutual assent, correspondingly a contract was formed.
Additional term - Non-Compete clause
Generally the offeror is the master of the offer, and in the final contract there was no mention of the non-compete clause. This would seem too indicate that the final contract did not contain the non-compete clause. There was no mention of an integration clause so the court will need to look at the contract to determine if it is a complete integration of the parties' agreement.
Parol Evidence admitted
The parol evidence rule states that not prior or contemporaneous oral agreements could be admitted to vary the terms of a written contract.
In this case the parol evidence rule would bar the admission of the evidence of the if the contract was deemed to be fully integrated.
Full integration?
The contract will be considered partially integrated assuming that the parties would have "normally" have been expected to leave things out.
In this case the non-compete was the essential term that Betty was bargaining for. Because of that it would not normally have been left out. Because of this the court will likely rule that the contract was completely integrated. And it will bar the parol evidence of the compete clause.
????33

Mutual Mistake?
In all contracts there must be a meeting of the minds. If it can be shown that both Betty and Sam intended for the non-compete clause to be in the final draft of the agreement, the court may add that term to do justice using it's "blue pencil provision."
In this case clearly Betty believed that the clause was included in the contract as she complained about Sam violating the clause. Sam too believed that the contract contained the clause; he argued the interpretation of the clause, not the clause's existence,
Therefore the purchase agreement will contain a covenant by Sam, not to compete with Betty.
Is the purchase agreement enforceable?
To avoid the enforceability of the validly formed contract a defense would need to exist to its enforcement.
Sam could assert the Statute of Frauds.
Because this contract cannot be completed in 1 year from the time it was made (because it included the non-compete clause) the Statute of frauds would need to apply. The statute can be satisfied by Full or part performance (to the extent of the performance) as well as a signed writing against the party to be charged, or promissory estoppal.
In this case Sam could argue that there is no writing that was signed by him; therefore the agreement cannot be charged against him. However there has been full performance on Betty's and she is able to enforce that contract to the extent she performed. Because she has fully performed, she may fully enforce the contract.
Did Sam Violate the validly formed covenant?
If Sam violated the contract he would be liable to Betty in breach.
????34

Further Examination of Mutual Mistake
Mutual mistake can be used to reform the contract (discussed supra).
In this case the non-compete agreement was placed in the contract by the court according to the mutual mistake. The court can only exercise its blue pencil provision to the extent of the mistake.
Here the merger clause was intended to be included in the contract; however Betty interpreted those terms differently than Sam. During the course of the negotiations Betty expressed that she wanted a non-compete clause in the contract. Sam acquiesced by drafting a clause that Betty agreed with and this agreement was evidenced by the signing of the contract when she thought that the contract contained the clause.
Because of this the clause will be incorporated as it was written, and as Sam did not violate the written clause he will not be liable in Breach.
?35

Betty v. Sam
1. Is there a covenant?
Controlling Law
Answer B to Question 3
???The contract is for the sale of an interior design business. Thus, the sale is not for goods and will be governed by common law.
Contract Formation
Preliminary Negotiation
Preliminary Negotiations are invitations to deal.
The facts stipulate that Sam and Betty were reviewing a purchase agreement when Betty wanted a covenant added which included a non-compete clause. The time spent reviewing the agreement and discussions over the purchase of the business would be considered preliminary negotiations.
Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation of present contractual intent containing definite and certain terms communicated to the offeree. Definite and certain terms include quantity, time, interested parties, subject matter, and price.
Betty will argue that when Sam sent Betty the original and one copy of the purchase agreement, he indicated his intent to be bound by the terms of the offer in selling his business to Betty. The offer stipulated Sam would sell his interior design business (quantity of one business and subject matter) to Betty (interested parties) for the contracted purchase price. The facts do not indicate a purchase price but the language
??36

"payment of the purchase price" indicates the price was agreed upon prior to sending the payment. The time can also be inferred by the facts that the offer was sent the next day and Betty signed and returned payment immediately.
The terms are definite and certain. Betty received the offer; thus it was communicated in writing.
There is a valid offer.
Acceptance
Acceptance in an unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
The facts stipulate that Betty returned the signed original agreement and returned it to Sam. There are no facts to indicate that she made any changes or additions; thus there was unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Valid acceptance exists.
Consideration
Consideration requires a bargained-for exchange which includes a legal detriment and benefit to both.
The facts stipulate that Sam agreed to sell Betty his interior design business in exchange for Betty's promise to pay Sam.
Betty incurs legal detriment by paying the purchase price and benefit by gaining ownership to the business. Sam incurs legal detriment by giving up ownership of his business and adhering to the non-compete clause. He gains a benefit by getting paid.
Sam's promise to give Betty the business is valid consideration for Betty's promise to pay the purchase price. A valid contract exists.
??37

Covenants
A covenant is a promise to perform under the terms of the contract.
Non-compete Clause
Betty will argue that Sam drafted the proposed language "Sam hereby agrees that he will not perform interior design services in Town for a period of two years" which was an express promise not to compete with her.
Sam will counter that the actual contract does not have the non-compete clause included and Betty's introduction of the evidence is barred by Parol Evidence.
Parol Evidence Rule
Any oral or written agreement made prior to or contemporaneous with the agreement cannot alter the terms of the contract.
Sam will argue that the agreement whereby Sam would include the non-compete language alters the terms of the final contract which was signed because there is nothing in the agreement that says he cannot compete.
Fully Integrated Contract
A contract is fully integrated if it was intended to be the parties' final expression.
Sam will claim that the contract was intended to be the final expression because it was the last step after preliminary negotiations and Betty signed and returned it to him.
Betty will counter that they did not make any expressions that the contract was to be the final statement and there is no merger clause. Thus, the contract is not fully integrated.
????38

Exception: Mutual Mistake
Parol Evidence will be admitted for the purpose of proving a mistake in the contract formation. Mutual mistake occurs when both parties are under a mistaken belief about a material term of the contract.
Betty will argue that Sam mistakenly sent her an unrevised version of the purchase agreement and she did not notice the discrepancy. Further, Betty will argue that both she and Sam agreed to the revision of the agreement prior to final integration, thus it was intended to be included and they both were mistaken as to its location within the contract.
Sam will counter that the mistake of sending the unrevised version was a unilateral mistake on Betty's part because she did not read the contract that he sent her. Thus, the mistake is not a defense.
However, the parol evidence will likely be admitted to show the parties' intent at the time of contract.
Exception: Ambiguity
Parol evidence will be admitted where terms in the agreement can have multiple meanings and the court must determine the meaning of the term at the time of contracting.
Betty will argue that Sam's statement that the jobs he took in town were "were on properties located outside Town" shows the verbiage in the covenant "Sam hereby agrees that he will not perform interior design services in Town for a period of two years" is ambiguous. Betty will claim that she told Sam she didn't want to compete with his "ties to your former clients in town" which referenced the clients, not the location of the service.
??39

Sam will counter that the non-compete clause indicated he could not perform services in town and said nothing about servicing clients who had other properties outside of town as well.
The courts will likely admit Parol Evidence to determine whether the intended agreement was in reference to the clients or the location.
THE AGREEMENT DID CONTAIN A COVENANT. 2. Is the purchase agreement enforceable?
Defense to Contract Formation: Statue of Frauds - Real Property
Contracts for the purchase of real property must be in writing signed by the party to be charged.
Sam will argue that his interior design business was an established business in town. It can be inferred that the business location was real property and Betty agreed to purchase the location in addition to the business. Thus, the contract falls within the Statute.
Sam will continue that he is the person to be charged because Betty is attempting to enforce the contract against him. Moreover, Sam never signed the purchase agreement that Betty mailed to him. Thus, there is no contract.
Sufficient Memo
Betty will counter that she has a copy of the original agreement that Sam mailed to her. In addition, Sam prepared the papers. Thus, it can be inferred that the name of Sam's business was on the agreement and contained all essential terms of the agreement.
Betty's copy will take the contract out of the Statute and it will be enforceable.
???40

3. Did Sam violate the covenant?
The issues here revolve around the Parol Evidence Rule and whether the court will allow evidence to explain the ambiguity. If the Parol Evidence is admitted and Betty's allowed to introduce her statement that she did not want to have to compete with Sam's ties to his former clients, then the term will likely be interpreted to mean clients, not location.
Breach
A breach is an unjust failure to perform which goes to the essence of the contract.
The issue here will be whether Sam's failure to adhere to the non-compete clause is a major or minor breach.
??41

Question 4
Cathy regularly fed neighborhood cats. As a result, she had dozens of cats living around her property. Darla operated a daycare center next door for a number of two- year-olds, including Ethan and Frank. Darla repeatedly asked Cathy not to feed the cats, explaining that they frequently came onto her property, defecated and urinated in a sandbox, and might scratch one of the children. Cathy continued feeding the cats.
Learning that cats are repelled by the smell of ammonia, Darla poured ammonia into the sandbox.
The next day, Ethan was scratched by one of the cats that Cathy fed and sustained a serious injury as a result of an ensuing infection. Frank ate sand while playing in the sandbox and sustained a serious injury as a result of ingesting ammonia.
What is the likely outcome of a negligence claim brought by:
1. Ethan's parents against Cathy, on behalf of Ethan? Discuss. 2. Ethan's parents against Darla, on behalf of Ethan? Discuss. 3. Frank's parents against Cathy, on behalf of Frank? Discuss. 4. Frank's parents against Darla, on behalf of Frank? Discuss.
42

Answer A to Question 4 I. Ethan's parents v. Cathy?
Negligence?-- Negligence is when the defendant fails to conform his or her conduct to the standard of care legally required thereby actually and proximately causing the plaintiff to suffer injuries. Ethan's parents must prove the elements of duty, breach, causation, and damages by a preponderance of the evidence.
Cathy owe a duty to Ethan?-- Generally, there is a duty of due care owed to foreseeable plaintiffs within the zone of danger created by the defendant's affirmative conduct.
Cathy fed cats and Ethan was a 2 year-old who went to the daycare that was next door to Cathy's property. First, the danger that feedings cats might result may be argued to be that cats are unsafe animals to be around small children. Second, Ethan's parent's may show that because Darla had told Cathy of the danger presented by bringing around so many cats that she was aware of children next door and should owe a duty to Ethan as a child who stays at Darla's daycare. Since Cathy was told repeatedly that feeding the cats may scratch one of the children, it is likely that Cathy did owe a duty to act reasonably. Lastly, as an adjacent land occupier, there is a duty to act reasonably to protect adjacent properties from activities on land. Therefore, Cathy does owe a duty to Ethan.
Breach?-- A breach occurs when the defendant fails to act as a reasonably prudent person under same or similar circumstances.
Here, Cathy continued to feed the cats. Under the Learned Hand Formula, if the burden to avoid creating the risk is less than the probability of harm occurring times the magnitude of injury, then it is said that the defendant may be acting unreasonably. Here, not feeding cats would clearly be a very low burden. Secondly, the magnitude of harm is
???43

that children next door may become scratched by cats or sick from the cats using the sandbox in the daycare. This is a high magnitude of injury created by Cathy. Lastly, the probability that cats may cause harm or illness would also be high because children are prone to disease and especially 2 year-olds would not know how to fend against cat scratches. As a result, it is likely that Cathy breached her duty of due care by continuing to feed the cats.
Actual cause?-- Actual cause is when but for the defendant's conduct the harm suffered by the plaintiff would not have occurred.
But for Cathy continuing to feed the cats, Ethan would not have been scratched. Therefore Cathy is clearly the actual cause.
Proximate cause?-- Proximate cause is when the harm suffered by the plaintiff is a foreseeable consequence of the defendant's conduct and there are no intervening superseding events to break the chain of causation.
Here, 2 year-olds being around cats presents a high risk that would be foreseeable to cause injury if the two came into contact. In addition, there are no unforeseeable intervening events to break the chain of causation. It is likely that Cathy would be the proximate cause as well.
Damages?-- To recover for negligence, the plaintiff must prove actual cognizable injury.
Facts show that Ethan was scratched by one of the cats that Cathy fed and sustained serious injury as a result of an ensuing infection.
Defenses?-- There does not seem to be any applicable defenses.
????44

II. Ethan's parents v. Darla?
Negligence?
Land occupier's duty?-- Ethan, entering Darla's daycare would be considered an invitee, which is a person who enters with a business purpose. Invitees are owed a reasonable duty of care to warn of natural and artificial conditions, to inspect and repair dangerous conditions, and to come to the aid of an injured invitee. As an invitee, Ethan was owed such duties.
Breach?-- The issue here is that Darla would clearly owe a duty, as a daycare operator, to make the premises safe, in that, she must take extra steps to make the premises safe; a mere warning would not be enough. Simply telling Cathy not to feed the cats repeatedly may not have been enough. It may have been unreasonable that Darla did not make some sort of fence to not allow the cats to enter to take other steps necessary to prevent Cathy (maybe a nuisance claim). Therefore, since Darla knew of the danger and failed to protect reasonably, there is a high probability that Darla will be in breach.
Causation-- supra. For the same reasons Cathy would be the actual and proximate cause, so will Darla.
Damages-- Supra. See discussion under Cathy; Ethan did suffer actual harm.
III. Frank's parents v. Cathy?
Negligence?-- The discussion for duty and breach would be the same for Frank as it was for Ethan. The issue here is whether Cathy was the actual and proximate cause of Frank's injury.
Actual cause-- (Defined supra) Here, if Cathy had not breached her duty to feed the cats, then Darla would not have poured ammonia into the sandbox. There was a direct
????????45

link to show that Cathy is the actual cause because it was the nuisance of the cats entering the property that Darla was trying to prevent. Therefore, even if Cathy is not the only actual cause, she is certainly a substantial factor when combined with Darla's conduct in bringing about Frank's harm.
Proximate cause-- (defined supra) Here, there are some larger issues to deal with, in that, Cathy feedings cats may not have caused a situation where it would have been foreseeable that Frank ate ammonia.
Does Darla's conduct cut off liability?-- An intervening act is usually not something that breaks the chain of causation unless it is shown that the act of a third person was unforeseeable. The key here is for Frank's parent's to show that it was foreseeable that being told of the cats and the danger to the children next door, that Darla may take precautions to prevent the cats from entering the sandbox. However, Cathy will assert that using ammonia was not a precaution that was foreseeable because there are other ways to prevent cats from entering one's property. In addition, Darla used a chemical that may present a clear danger to children, and that in itself was unforeseeable because Darla is a daycare operator and should have known better. As a result, it is more likely than not that Darla's conduct was a superseding event that broke the chain of causation. Furthermore, the type of harm suffered by Frank was not within the scope created by feedings cats because Frank was injured from ingesting ammonia, which is not a risk that being around cats creates. Cathy will not be the proximate cause.
Damages-- assuming Cathy is negligent, Frank's parent would recover because Frank was seriously injured from ingesting ammonia.
Is Contributory/ Comparative negligence applicable here?-- If a plaintiff fails to act as a reasonable person in protecting him or herself from defendant's conduct, then under contributory negligence jurisdictions the plaintiff will be barred from recovery. Under comparative negligence jurisdictions, the plaintiff's unreasonableness only reduces recovery in proportion to his or her own fault. (In pure comparative negligence
???46

jurisdictions, any proportion not attributable to the plaintiff may be reduced; however, if the jurisdiction follows the modified comparative jurisdiction, then if the plaintiff's fault is 50% or more, then the plaintiff will be barred from recovery).
Here, Frank is a 2 year-old and will be held to the standard of care to a reasonable child with similar age, experience, and intelligence. Since the standard is for such a young age, it is foreseeable that a 2 year-old might eat sand. Therefore, it would be unlikely that Frank's parents' recovery would be barred or reduced depending on the jurisdiction.
IV. Frank's parents against Darla, on behalf of Frank?
Strict liability of abnormally dangerous activity?-- A defendant who engages in an abnormally dangerous activity will be strictly liable for harm suffered by foreseeable plaintiffs. An abnormally dangerous activity is one that the risk of cannot be eliminated by due care and is one that poses a high risk of danger to humans.
Here, putting ammonia in a sandbox may be argued by Frank's parents to be an abnormally dangerous activity because placing harsh chemicals in a sandbox that children play in presents a very high risk of harm to children. Second, placing ammonia in a sandbox in a daycare center is something that usually does not take place in such a manner. Third, Frank's parents will argue that no matter how careful or reasonable Darla was in placing the chemical there, the danger it presented to children could not be eliminated by due care. Furthermore, Frank's parents would have to prove actual and proximate cause.
Actual cause-- (supra defined)-- But for the ammonia Frank would not have been injured.
Proximate cause-- (supra defined)-- Usually, a sandbox in a daycare center means that it is highly foreseeable that children will play in the sandbox. Darla, by placing the ammonia in the sandbox created exactly such a risk that caused Frank to suffer harm. It
????47

was clearly foreseeable that Frank may come into contact with the ammonia. Therefore, Darla may be the proximate cause.
Damages-- Supra. Frank suffered serious injury.
Defenses-- For abnormally dangerous activities, contributory negligence is not followed; however, in most jurisdictions, comparative fault is. Nevertheless, because of Frank's age, 2, it is likely that his fault will not be a consideration for this suit.
Negligence-- for the same reasons Darla would owe a duty to Ethan, she would also owe a duty to Frank because Frank was an invitee too.
Breach-- Although Darla will assert that she was trying to get rid of the dangerous condition of having cats enter the sandbox to defecate and urinate was reasonable to protect the children from cat scratches, there is also ample room for Frank's parents to assert that the resulting consequence was more harmful than what she was trying to prevent. It was almost certain that children would come into contact with the ammonia because the children play in the sandbox; however, on the other hand, it was not certain that children would get scratched by cats. As a result, it is likely that Darla's conduct does amount to a breach.
Actual cause--supra. Clearly, if Darla had not poured ammonia in the sand, Frank would not have sustained serious injuries as a result of ingesting the ammonia.
Proximate cause-- supra. It would be foreseeable that children may come into contact with the sand and suffer harm. There was no intervening events that would break the chain of causation.
Damages-- Supra. Frank suffered serious injury and Frank's parents will be able to recover if it is shown that Darla was negligent.
???????48

Contributory/Comparative fault-- supra. For the same reasons Frank is probably not unreasonable because of his age and the applicable child standard of care, it will be likely that eating the sand, although very unreasonable for an adult, may not be unreasonable for a child of 2 years of age.
?49

Ethan v. Cathy
Answer B to Question 4
?What is the likely outcome of a negligence claim brought by Ethan (through his parents) against Cathy? In order to be liable for negligence, it must be shown that Cathy breached a duty owed to Ethan and that breach caused Ethan harm.
1. Duty and Breach. At a minimum, Cathy will owe Ethan the general duty care, which is to act as the reasonably prudent person in same or similar circumstances. It may be reasonable that a person would feel sympathetic toward stray animals and want to feed them. However, Cathy was aware that a daycare facility was operated next door. She was further advised that the cats were entering the daycare property and using the sandbox as a litter box. Finally, Darla expressed concerns that one of the children might become injured. Continuing to the feed the cats would obviously encourage the animals to continue to hang around and present a nuisance and potential risk to the children. Additionally, Cathy could have called an animal shelter to take in the animals or sought suitable owners for them who might be willing to take and care for a stray cat. It appears she did nothing to help improve the situation. Thus, Cathy continuing to feed the cats under these circumstances is probably not reasonable and constitutes a breach of the duty owed.
2. Causation. In order for causation to be satisfied, both actual and proximate cause must exist. Actual cause will be satisfied if but for the defendant's conduct, the harm would not have occurred. But for Cathy continuing to feed the cats, the cats would not have been hanging around and Ethan would not have been scratched. Therefore, actual cause is present here.
In order for proximate cause to be satisfied, the harm caused must be foreseeable. The cats may not be domesticated; they are strays. Even domesticated cats can scratch, but if these cats are feral they may be even more inclined to do so. Additionally, Darla made
??50

clear that the cats were coming onto her property and particularly raised concerns that the children could get scratched. Thus, the type of harm caused was foreseeable, and proximate cause is met here.
3. Damages. In order for a cause of action for negligence to be successful, the plaintiff must have suffered damage. Here, Ethan was scratched and suffered an infection, so he was damaged.
4. Defenses. Can Cathy raise a defense of assumption of the risk? In order for this defense to be successful, Ethan would have had to have known and appreciated the risk involved in order to assume it. Ethan is only 2 years old, so he probably thinks the cat is a harmless furrry friend. Further, there is no indication that Ethan's parents were made aware of the cat problem so that they could have assumed the risk of continuing to bring Ethan to the daycare. Therefore, assumption of risk is not likely to hold here.
Based on the discussion above, Cathy is liable to Ethan for negligence.
Ethan v. Darla
What is the likely outcome of a negligence claim brought by Ethan against Darla?
1. Duty and Breach. Because Darla is a land occupier, a special duty will apply as to invitees. An invitee is a person who is on the property of a land occupier with consent and is there to confer an economic benefit upon the land occupier or the land is held open to the public at large. Both apply here: Ethan is present on the property as a patron of the daycare services, and daycare centers are open to the public. Therefore, Ethan is an invitee.
In the case of invitees, a land occupier has a duty to make the premises safe, including taking affirmative steps to find problems that pose a risk and to remedy those problems. Darla was aware of the cat problem and that it posed a risk to the children's safety.
????51

Because Darla's requests were 'repeated' and given the number of cats that had congregated around Cathy's home, it can be assumed the problem has existed for some time. Darla attempted to persuade Cathy to stop feeding the cats so that the cats would stop entering the daycare property. When Cathy failed to comply with Darla's requests, Darla tried to fix the issue by deterring the cats with a smell they did not like. This may not have been enough, as Darla could have called an animal shelter to come take the cats or erecting barriers that would prevent the animals from entering the property. However, it is probably sufficient to show that she was trying to make the property safe. Therefore, there will not be a breach of duty with respect to Ethan.
2. Causation. Rather than the but-for test, it may be more appropriate in this lawsuit to use the substantial factor test here to show actual causation. Under this test, the defendant's conduct will be the actual cause of the plaintiff's harm if the defendant's conduct was a substantial factor that materially contributed to the plaintiff's harm. If it is found that Darla should have done more to ensure that her property was safe as to invitees, her conduct will be factored in Ethan's harm. However, the real origin of the problems lies with Cathy feeding the cats; this is probably a greater factor in what has caused the danger to exist. Therefore, actual cause would be difficult to meet here.
Proximate cause is met, because getting scratched by a stray cat is foreseeable.
In this instance, causation would not be met.
3. Damages. Damages exist because Ethan was scratched and had an infection.
4. Defenses. If Ethan were able to make the prima facie case for negligence, Darla would probably not have any defenses.
Based on the discussion above, Darla would not be liable to Ethan for negligence.
???52

Frank v. Cathy
What is the likely outcome of a negligence claim brought by Frank against Cathy?
1. Duty and Breach. The duty Cathy owes to Frank is the same as she owes to Ethan, discussed above. Cathy breached this duty as to Frank in the same manner as she did for Ethan, discussed above.
2. Causation. But for Cathy's conduct, cats would not have been on the property, and Frank would not have been injured. Actual cause is met here.
However, while children eating sand (whether deliberately or inadvertently while playing around in the sandbox) is foreseeable, ingesting ammonia is not a foreseeable harm from having cats on the property. Additionally, when there is an intervening act that is highly improbable and extraordinary, it will cut off the defendant's liability. It is highly improbable that a daycare operator would pour a seriously toxic chemical into the children's sandbox, knowing that it may come into contact with the children's skin or that it may be ingested. Therefore, Darla's act in pouring the ammonia into the sandbox is a superseding, intervening event which cuts off any liability on the part of Cathy for Frank's injuries.
3. Damages. Frank was damaged when he ingested the ammonia tainted sand and sustained serious injury.
4. Defenses. If Frank were able to make out his prima facie case, Cathy would not have any defenses.
Based on the discussion above, Cathy will not be liable to Frank for negligence.
????53

Frank v. Darla
What is the likely outcome of a negligence claim brought by Frank against Darla?
1. Duty and Breach. The duty owed to Frank by Darla will be the same land occupier duty as Darla owes to Ethan. In this lawsuit, Darla was attempting to better the situation with the cats, but she chose a method that actually posed considerable risk to the children's safety. In doing so, she made the premises unsafe, and, thus, breached the duty owed to Frank.
2. Causation. But for Darla pouring ammonia into the sandbox, Frank would not have ingested it and become injured.
4. Damages. Frank was damaged when he suffered serious injury.
5. Defenses. If Frank is able to make his prima facie case for negligence, Darla will
have no defenses.
Based on the discussion above, Darla is liable for negligence.
?????54



?Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2013
California First-Year Law Students' Examination

ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2013 CALIFORNIA FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the essay questions from the June 2013 California First Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received good grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were typed as submitted, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. The answers are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
Applicants were given four hours to answer four essay questions. Instructions for the essay examination appear on the following page.
??Question Number 1.
2.
3. 4.
Subject Criminal Law
Torts
Contracts Criminal Law
??1

?JUNE 2013
??California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all 4 questions.
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines which are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer according to legal theories and principles of general application.
????2

QUESTION 1
Angela and Bart are animal rights activists. Angela lived near a horse ranch owned by Chris. She told Bart that she suspected the horses were being abused because she saw people going in and out of the barn at all hours of the day and night, and suggested that they go there to investigate.
Unable to open the ranch gate, Angela and Bart climbed the fence, crossed the yard, opened the door to the barn, and stepped inside. There, they found healthy horses, but also a large amount of stolen electronic equipment.
Surprised to see intruders, Chris, who was carrying a rifle, pointed it at Angela and Bart and accidentally caused it to discharge. The bullet hit the side of the barn near Angela and Bart. The noise startled the horses. Angela and Bart fled, letting out the horses. A motorist, who was driving down the road, swerved to miss the stampeding horses, crashed into a tree, and died.
1. With what crimes, if any, can Angela reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can she reasonably raise? Discuss.
2. Withwhatcrimes,ifany,canBartreasonablybecharged,andwhatdefenses,ifany, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
3. With what crimes, if any, can Chris reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
?3

Angela's criminal liability:
Answer A to Question 1
I. Conspiracy: An agreement between two or more people to commit a crime with the intent that the crime be committed.
Here, Angela and Bart agreed to go to the barn to investigate possible horse abuse. At issue is what was the crime to be committed? Angela suspected that horses were being abused, and wanted to break into Chris' land to investigate (burglary, if there is an intent to commit a felony once inside), but it is unclear what they intended to do after entering the barn. Given that Angela & Bart are animal rights activists, it can be presumed that if they did see horses being abused, they may have taken immediate action such as taking the horses (larceny).
If it was their intent to commit a crime once inside the barn, then they would be found liable for conspiracy as the conspiracy is complete once the agreement is made; the crime does not actually have to be committed.
II. Burglary: At common Law, burglary is a breaking and entering at nighttime, into the dwelling house of another, with the intent to commit a felony inside.
Here, Angela and Bart did commit a breaking by opening the door to the barn and an entering by stepping inside. Although this is not a dwelling house of another -- it is a barn -- common law recognizes structures near the main house as part of the dwelling, so the barn being on the property of the ranch satisfies this element. Modernly, the law has been expanded to include any protected structure, so either way, this element will be satisfied.
??4

This case will turn, however, on what Angela & Bart's intent was once they entered the barn. To be liable for burglary, one must have the specific intent to commit a felony. The facts are unclear as to what their intent was once they entered the barn. Angela's stated purpose was to investigate, which is not a felony. Assuming that she had no intent other than to investigate, Angela will not be found guilty of burglary.
III. Homicide for the death of motorist:
Homicide: An unlawful killing of a human being caused by the defendant.
Causation: To be guilty, the defendant must have been the actual cause and proximate cause of the death.
Actual Cause: Established when, "but for" the defendant's acts, the death would not have occurred. Here, "but for" Angela and Bart's letting out the horses, the horses would not have been on the road, causing the motorist to swerve and crash. Actual cause established.
Proximate Cause: Established when the death is a foreseeable result of the defendant's conduct and there are no superseding events to break the chain of causation. Here, it is foreseeable that when one lets out a group of frightened horses that they will stampede off the property and cause injury to passersby. That one of those passersby was a driver who had to swerve to avoid them is foreseeable. Proximate cause established.
Murder: A homicide committed with malice aforethought.
Malice: Malice can be shown by an intent to kill; intent to cause serious bodily injury;
depraved heart or a killing that occurred in the res gestae of a felony. 5
???????
Here, Angela did not show any intent to kill, cause serious bodily injury or demonstrate a willful disregard for human life (depraved-heart) as she merely wanted to investigate whether animals were being abused. Further, most animal rights activists are peace- loving individuals so it is unlikely she had any intent to harm Motorist. As to felony- murder, they were simply at the barn to investigate, not commit a felony, so this does not apply either.
Since malice cannot be shown, Angela would not be guilty of murder.
Voluntary Manslaughter: A heat of passion killing or murder with mitigating circumstances.
Since malice cannot be established for murder, there was no adequate provocation or mitigating circumstances, Angela would not be found guilty of voluntary manslaughter.
Involuntary Manslaughter: An unintended homicide without malice aforethought. This can fall into two types: criminal negligence or misdemeanor-manslaughter.
Criminal Negligence: Reckless conduct which creates a great risk of death.
Here, Angela broke into Chris' barn, which created a risk that someone would be harmed. She had seen people going in and out of the barn at all hours of the day and night, so knew that there was some type of activity happening on the premises that was atypical. Further, breaking into someone else's dwelling at night creates a risk in and of itself. That she then fled after being confronted by Chris and let out a group of frightened stampeding horses further created a high risk of death. She had other options other than fleeing and letting the horses out -- she could have stopped, raised her arms, etc.
Defenses: There are no viable defenses.
6
????
Angela will likely be found guilty for the involuntary manslaughter for the death of Motorist.
Bart's criminal liability:
I. Conspiracy: supra. If it can be found that Angela & Bart did have a criminal intent
when they agreed to investigate possible horse abuse, Bart will be liable for conspiracy.
Pinkerton's Rule: One is liable as a co-conspirator for all the crimes committed by their co-conspirators that were a natural and foreseeable consequence of the crime or done in furtherance of the crime.
II. Burglary: Discussion supra. (incorporated by reference). Bart will likely not be found guilty of burglary.
III. Homicide: Discussion supra. (incorporated by reference). Here, Bart and Angela were equal participants in the activities of the night and the facts state that Angela & Bart fled, letting out the horses. While it is not clear if one or the other actually let the horses out, this is irrelevant, as co-conspirators are liable for the crimes committed by the other. Accordingly, Bart will be found guilty for involuntary manslaughter in the death of Motorist.
Chris' criminal liability:
I. Assault (towards Angela & Bart): An intentional causing of an apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive contact, or an attempted battery.
??????7

Here, Chris pointed his gun and pointed it at Angela & Bart, which would likely cause Angela & Bart to fear getting shot at. Further, while the gun may have accidentally discharged, Angela and Bart likely did not know it was an accident and the fact that they fled demonstrates that they had an apprehension of getting shot (a harmful contact.).
Defenses: Defense of Property One is privileged to use a reasonable amount of force as reasonably believed necessary to protect one's property. In any event, it cannot be deadly force unless the owner is in fear of death or serious bodily injury towards themselves.
Here, Chris was surprised by the intruders and pointed his gun at them to protect his property. While the gun was certainly a threat of deadly force, he did not actually intentionally discharge it or fire at them, so it can be argued that his actions were reasonable under the circumstances as he used absolutely no intentional physical violence at all towards Angela and Bart, but rather just wanted to scare them.
It is likely that Chris' defense will prevail and he will not be found liable for assault.
II. Receiving Stolen Property: Knowingly accepting property that one knows or has reason to know is stolen.
Here, it is unclear how that property got to Chris' barn, but it can be presumed that since there were people going in and out of the barn at all hours of the night, that Chris was accepting the property knowing it to be stolen. As he runs a horse ranch and the horses are housed inside the barn, this is a place he would need to enter daily to care for the horses, so of course he would see that there was a large amount of stolen electronic equipment in there. Accordingly, he cannot claim that someone put it in there without his knowledge.
Chris would be found guilty of receiving stolen property.
?8

State V Angela (A) Solicitation
Answer B to Question 1
??Encouraging inciting another to commit a crime. May merge with target crimes and defendant will be charged with greater crime.
When A suggested to B that they go to the horse ranch owned by C, she solicited B to commit the crimes stated infra.
A will be guilty of solicitation.
Conspiracy
Agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act or a lawful act by unlawful means.
Facts do not indicate that B expressly agreed to go to C's ranch and investigate, but since he accompanied A, the State will argue there was an agreement.
A will be found guilty of conspiracy.
Trespass to land
Intentionally entering the land of another without consent or privilege.
When A climbed the fence and crossed the yard to gain access to the horse ranch owned by Chris (C), it would appear she was trespassing on the land of another with consent.
??9

Burglary--Common Law
The breaking and entering into the dwelling of another at nighttime with the specific intent to commit a felony therein.
When A opened the door to the barn, she committed a breaking. When she stepped inside, she entered. Facts do not indicate if the barn was considered curtilage (if it was situated near enough to the dwelling to be considered part of the area), so the dwelling element may fail. Further, facts do not indicate if it was nighttime or not. Since A and B are animal rights activists, it may be inferred that they intended to unlawfully interfere with the horses, but facts are not clear.
She will not be guilty of common law burglary.
Modern law burglary
Breaking and entering into any structure with specific intent to commit a crime therein.
Since A did break, enter and may have had intent to commit a crime, she may be found guilty of modern law burglary.
Defenses
Necessity
A may claim that her trespass and all other crimes were necessary to stop possible abuse of animals. State will argue that she simply could have been informed law enforcement instead.
This defense will fail.
????10

State V Bart (B)
Accomplice Liability
Accomplice liability may be found if a defendant has knowledge, intent and actively assist in the perpetration of a crime.
Facts state B was with A during the incident, and that they are both animal rights activists working in concert. He was an accomplice to the crimes of A.
Conspiracy
Defined supra.
B will be found guilty as a co-conspirator.
Pinkerton's rule
All members of a conspiracy are liable for all crimes in furtherance or probable consequence of.
B will be found guilty of all crimes A is charged with.
Defenses Necessity
Defined supra.
This defense will fail.
??????11

State v Chris (C)
Possession of stolen property
Facts only indicate that the stolen property was in the barn on C's property. It could be inferred that the stolen property belonged to C, but since facts do not support, this charge will fail.
Assault
Attempted battery.
When C pointed the rifle at A and B, he committed an assault. Since he used a deadly weapon, he could be charged with aggravated assault.
Attempted murder
Attempt can be shown through specific intent, apparent ability, and moving from preparation to perpetration.
When C went to his barn with his rifle, he showed specific intent that could lead to injury. Since he had a gun, he was apparently able to injure and when he pointed it at A and B and it discharged, he went from perpetration to perpetration of the crime.
C could be charged with attempted murder.
Homicide of Motorist (M)
The killing of one human being by another.
A motorist (M) who was driving down the road died, so there was a homicide.
?????12

Murder
The unlawful of one human being by another.
When C discharged his rifle, he caused a chain of events which culminated in the death of the motorist.
Causation Actual cause
But for C discharging the rifle, M would not have been killed.
C is the actual cause of the death of M.
Proximate cause
It is foreseeable that when one discharges a firearm that someone could get injured or killed. C will argue that the bullet hit the side of the barn and that the horses stampeding into the road was an intervening act, thus breaking the chain of causation. State will argue that the intervening act is foreseeable and the animal reaction was a normal response to the gun firing. Moreover, it is foreseeable that a motorist would swerve to avoid hitting animals and possibly crash.
C is the proximate cause of the death of M.
Malice
The mens rea of murder may be found through 1) specific intent to kill, 2) specific intent to seriously injure, 3) wanton, conduct/depraved heart, and 4) felony murder.
The facts state that C accidentally caused the rifle he was carrying and had pointed at A and B, to discharge. It would appear that he did so accidently, so if the state cannot establish malice, C would be charged with involuntary manslaughter (see below).
????13

Second-degree murder
All murders other than first-degree.
If the state can prove malice through wanton conduct, C may be charged with second degree murder.
Involuntary Manslaughter
The accidental killing of one human being by another without malice, but with gross negligence.
The facts state that the gun accidentally discharged as C pointed it at A and B. State will argue that his actions were reckless and negligent. C will argue that the firing of the gun was an unfortunate accident.
C could be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter absent any defenses.
Defenses
Defense of property
Use of reasonable force to protect property.
C will contend that he was surprised to see A and B intruding on his property, and he was within his rights to defend it. Since use of deadly force is only permitted when one's life is at danger, it appears C exceeded his privilege since the facts do not indicate his life was in any imminent danger from A and B.
This defense will fail due to the excessive force used.
????14

QUESTION 2
Abe wanted to cut down a tree that was growing on public property bordering his house because he did not want to rake its leaves. When Abe attempted to do so, Bill, who lived across the street, demanded that he stop. Abe refused and, holding his saw in front of him, took two steps toward Bill. Avoiding Abe, Bill climbed high into the tree, insisting he would not come down because he wanted to save the tree. Abe nevertheless sawed through the trunk of the tree, which fell into the street with Bill in it, causing Bill serious injuries.
Cindy, a passerby, rushed to help Bill. As she was assisting him, she was struck by a car and sustained serious injuries.
Debbie, a neighbor, watched the entire incident from her front porch and suffered severe emotional distress as a result.
1. Is Bill likely to prevail on any intentional tort claim against Abe? Discuss. 2 . Is Cindy likely to prevail on a negligence claim against Abe? Discuss.
3. Is Debbie likely to prevail on a negligent infliction of emotional distress claim against Abe? Discuss.
?15

I. Bill v. Abe
Assault
Answer A to Question 2
??Assault is to intentionally cause the reasonable apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive touching in another person. Intent is either the conscious desire to bring about the result or the substantial certainty that such a result will occur. Here, Abe, while holding his saw in front of him, took two steps towards Bill. Abe may have simply been proceeding with his plan to cut down the tree, and may not have had any intention whatsoever to cause Bill any apprehension. However, because this was a confrontational situation, a reasonable person would have had the substantial certainty that his act would cause such apprehension in Bill; therefore the intent element is satisfied. Bill took steps to avoid Abe, which shows that he likely felt apprehension because of Abe's act, and this would be reasonable under the circumstances as this was a confrontational situation. Abe is most likely liable for assault.
Battery
Battery is the intentional cause of harmful or offensive touching of another person. Intent is clearly satisfied here, because Abe had substantial certainty that Bill would suffer a harmful touching by Abe's voluntary act of cutting down the tree. Abe is liable for battery.
Defenses--
Abe really doesn't have any defenses to either of these torts, but he could argue necessity. Necessity is a valid defense if the harm avoided outweighs the harm inflicted. Here, the harm avoided would be Abe's raking leaves, and the harm inflicted is Bill's serious injuries. Clearly the harm avoided does not outweigh the harm inflicted, so this defense would fail.
??16

Conclusion--
Bill would prevail for the intentional torts of assault and battery. Damages are presumed for intentional torts.
II. Cindy v. Abe
Negligence
A person is liable for negligence if they owe a duty, the duty is breached, they are the cause of harm, and the other party suffers damages.
Duty-- Generally one owes a duty of reasonable care to all foreseeable plaintiffs under the circumstances. Here, there are no special relationships between Cindy and Abe, so Abe will be held to this reasonably prudent person standard.
Breach-- The duty is breached if the defendant fails to act as a reasonably prudent person under the circumstances. One method to determine if a duty is breached is to compare the burden to avoid the harm and the utility of the defendant's conduct against the gravity of harm combined with the likelihood of the harm. Here, Abe's burden to avoid any harm was rather low, since all he needed to do was not cut down the tree. Additionally, Abe may have been able to simply contact the local municipality and have them address his problem with the tree. The utility of Abe's conduct is also rather low, since his only benefit was the relief from having to rake leaves. The gravity of the harm suffered by Cindy was great as she suffered serious injury. The likelihood of Cindy suffering such injury was also relatively high, since Abe knew that Bill was in the tree and was likely to be injured, which would prompt a passerby to assist Bill. Based on this analysis, Abe breached his duty of reasonable care to Cindy, since the gravity of harm and the likelihood of harm greatly outweigh the burden to avoid the harm and the utility of Abe's conduct.
????17

Causation-- In order to be liable for negligence, the defendant must be both the actual cause and proximate cause of the harm.
Actual cause-- one test used to determine actual cause is the but for test; but for Abe's cutting down the tree, would Cindy have been injured? Clearly the answer is no, so under this test Abe is an actual cause of harm. Another test used to determine actual cause is the substantial factor test; was Abe a substantial factor in Cindy's harm? Again the answer is clear; Abe was a substantial factor in Cindy's harm. Under either test, Abe is an actual cause of harm.
Proximate cause-- Were there any intervening acts which caused Cindy's harm? Abe may contend that the car which struck Cindy was an intervening act, but this act was foreseeable since the tree was caused to fall into the street. Therefore, this intervening act would not cut off liability. Next we ask, was the harm suffered by Cindy foreseeable. Since the tree had fallen in the street, and since Bill was in the tree when it was cut down, it was entirely foreseeable that a passerby would stop to render aid to Bill. It is also foreseeable that Cindy would suffer both the type of injury suffered and the extent of the injury. Therefore, Abe is a proximate cause of Cindy's harm.
Damages-- Cindy suffered serious injuries, so this element is obviously satisfied.
Defenses--
Assumption of the risk occurs when the plaintiff knows of the danger involved and voluntarily proceeds anyway. The facts do not state if Cindy knew of the car coming which caused her injury. Even if she did know of it, Cindy could argue that her act was not voluntary because Bill was in peril and required rescue.
Comparative fault/Contributory negligence-- If Cindy failed to act in a reasonable way and was a cause of her own injuries, then she could be found to be comparatively at fault or contributory negligent, depending on the jurisdiction. The majority rule is comparative fault, which states that plaintiff's damages will be reduced by the proportion of their fault in their own injury.
?????18

Contributory negligence states that plaintiff's recovery will be barred if found to be a cause of their own injury. Cindy can claim that she acted perfectly reasonable under the circumstances, because there was an emergency situation. Under emergency situations, the actor is to act reasonably under the circumstances at hand, even if in hindsight it is shown that they did not take the wisest course of action. Cindy most likely will be found to have acted reasonably under the circumstances, and her recovery will not be reduced or barred.
Conclusion--
Cindy will prevail and she will be entitled to compensatory damages which would include medical expenses, lost time from work, and pain & suffering. If it was found that Abe acted maliciously, then punitive damages may also be awarded.
III. Debbie v. Abe
Negligent Infliction of Emotional Distress (NIED)
Debbie is a bystander; bystander NIED is established if the defendant, through negligence, causes emotional distress to a bystander who witnesses the event, the witnessing of the event is what causes the emotional distress, and if the bystander is a close relative of the one who is injured. Debbie is a neighbor, and not a close relative, so this action would fail. Abe is not liable for NIED.
???19

Bill v. Abe
Assault
Answer B to Question 2
??Assault is the intentional infliction of reasonable apprehension of imminent harmful or offensive contact to another without consent.
Here when Abe went to cut down the tree and Bill demanded he stop, Abe took two steps towards Bill with his saw in front of himself. We next learn that Bill, to avoid Abe, climbed high into the tree. This shoes Bill's apprehension of possible harmful contact with Abe and his saw. Since a saw can be used as a deadly weapon, that would at least would cause serious harm, it is reasonable for Bill to feel apprehension of Abe. The only question that remains is that of intention.
Intent is the conscious desire or knowledge that a result will occur or the substantial certainty a result will occur. Since we know Abe wanted to cut the tree down because of the leaves that were left on his lawn, and also that Abe refused Bill's attempt to stop his action, it is reasonable to ascertain Abe was substantially certain approaching Bill with the saw would make him apprehensive and leave, allowing him to continue to cut the tree down.
We also know from the facts, that nowhere does Bill consent to the assault.
Abe would be liable for assault on Bill.
Battery
Battery is the intentional infliction of harmful or offensive contact on another without consent.
Intent defined supra.
When Abe proceeded to cut down the tree, knowing Bill was in the tree, we can reasonably assume Abe was substantially certain Bill would fall with the tree.
Since we also know that the fall caused Bill serious injuries, the contact by Abe, made via the saw, to the tree, to the street was harmful contact.
Abe would be liable to Bill for battery.
?20

False imprisonment
False imprisonment is the intentional confinement of another, to a defined area against their will.
Intent defined supra.
Abe will argue Bill was not confined in the tree, although this was a defined area, as he could have climbed down at any time.
Bill will argue that since Abe threatened him with the saw prior to climbing the tree, he felt continued intimidation by Abe and his saw if he did not climb down. He will argue it was unreasonable to climb down in the face of such risk.
Additionally Bill will argue that he was up in the tree against his will because of the above risks.
It is likely Abe will be liable for false imprisonment of Bill.
Cindy v. Abe
Liability for negligence requires proof of a duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff, a breach of that duty, and that the breach was the actual and proximate cause of damages suffered by the plaintiff.
General duty
Everyone owes a duty to use due care so as not to expose others to unreasonable risks of harm.
Here Abe owes a duty to Cindy so as not to expose her to unreasonable risks of harm.
Special duty
Here, the special relationship of Cindy to Bill: that of victim to rescuer extends any duty of Abe to Bill to include Cindy. This was expressed in the landmark case adjudicated by Judge Cardozo which led to the expression "danger invites rescue". Since Abe was responsible for Bill needing rescue, Abe is also liable to any rescuer of Bill, whom he placed in danger.
Therefore, Abe owes a special duty to Cindy.
Breach
Breach is a failure to act as a reasonable person in the same or similar situation as one with a similar duty. This is often measured using the Learned Hand calculus, measuring the risks versus the utility.
?????21

Here, Abe cut the tree down, which contained Bill and knowing he would fall and likely be hurt, requiring a potential rescuer. The utility of cutting the tree down, merely so he did not have to rake up the leaves, is not worth the significant risks of serious injury or death from doing so. Abe acted in an unreasonable fashion.
Abe breached his duty to Cindy. Actual cause
An actual cause is the cause which starts, ignites or makes possible the results which follow and fills the "but for" or substantial certainty test.
"But for" Abe cutting down the tree, Bill would not have fallen and gotten hurt. If Bill had not gotten hurt, Cindy would not be required to come to his aid. If Cindy did not come to his aid, she would not have been struck by a car and sustained serious injuries.
Proximate cause
An actual cause of harm is also the proximate cause of harm if what follows is a natural, unbroken chain of events, uninterrupted by independent, unforeseeable intervening events, and results in the harm.
Here, Abe may argue it is not foreseeable that a rescuer would be struck by an automobile, trying to help someone who fell in a tree. The argument will likely fail since the tree abutted the street and the tree fell in the street where cars are likely to be found. Since Cindy had no choice where to treat Bill, it is foreseeable she may be injured from a passing car.
Abe's breach is the proximate cause of Cindy's injuries.
Damages
Damages include special damages such as actual monetary expenditures and lost wages as well as general damages such as pain and suffering. Damages may also include punitive damages, to set an example of the defendant and possibly loss of consortium.
We are told in the scenario that Cindy sustained "serious injuries". These will likely require hospital bills, time off of work as well as pain and suffering she sustained from the accident. It is also likely a court may find Abe's behavior reckless and grossly negligent and may impose punitive damages.
Cindy sustained damages.
Abe will be liable to Cindy for negligence.
???22

Defenses
Contributory negligence
In some jurisdictions, if it is found that the plaintiff contributed in some way to their damages, it may bar any recovery from the defendant. In other jurisdictions of comparative fault, if the plaintiff contributes to a portion of his damages this may be reduced from the monetary award in judgment by the percentage that the plaintiff is at fault. Further, if the plaintiff had the last opportunity to avoid harm by taking appropriate action, his recovery may be barred in the last clear chance doctrine.
The only potential argument to be raised by Abe is that Cindy contributed to her own injuries by being in the street, placing her at risk for injury. But, as discussed above, this argument will fail as she had no choice where to treat Bill.
No successful defenses will be raised.
Debbie v. Abe
Negligent infliction of emotional distress
Negligent infliction of emotional distress is the negligent conduct of extreme and outrageous nature which causes severe emotional distress of one in the zone of danger.
Negligent conduct defined and described supra.
Abe was negligent.
Abe will argue his actions were not extreme or outrageous since his use of the saw to cut a tree down is common practice and sometimes people get hurt during this process. Debbie will argue it is extreme and outrageous when one attempts to cut a tree down with someone up in the tree that is likely to sustain severe damages.
Abe's conduct was extreme and outrageous.
We're told in the facts that Debbie suffered severe emotional distress so this would not be an issue.
Abe will argue Debbie was not in the zone of danger. Although Debbie was a neighbor and watched the incident from her porch, Abe will argue she had no significant relationship to Bill that would cause her severe emotional distress. Most courts require some relationship between the plaintiff and the victim of the negligent action. Here no such relationship appears to exist.
????23

Debbie will argue she is a neighbor of Bill and this should constitute a sufficient relationship.
Abe will further argue that most courts will require some form of physical manifestation of the severe emotional distress for a successful claim and the facts do not state Debbie suffered any physical ailments from her emotional distress.
It is unlikely that she will prevail in an action for negligent infliction of emotional distress against Abe.
24

QUESTION 3
Sally wanted to sell an antique doll that she had inherited. She posted a photograph of the doll on her Facebook page with a note stating:
Last month, one just like this sold on eBay for $650! I'll sell it to any of you for $450. First person I hear from gets it. Otherwise, after five days, I'll sell it on eBay. Call me - no Facebook allowed at my job.
That same day, Barbara, one of Sally's Facebook friends, saw Sally's post. She believed that the doll might be worth more than $450. She soon learned from a local antique dealer that it was worth $1,500. She used her tablet computer to go on Sally's Facebook page. There, she saw a note posted by Judy, another Facebook friend of Sally, stating: "The doll is worth way more than you think. Don't sell it." Barbara then left a note stating, "I'll take the doll for $450. Barbara." Later, she called Sally and said, "This is Barbara, and I'll buy the doll for $450." Sally replied, "Sorry, you're too late." Barbara looked again at Facebook and saw a new note from Sally stating: "Thanks for the information, Judy. The doll is going straight to eBay."
1. Did Barbara enter into an enforceable contract with Sally? Discuss.
2. If Barbara entered into an enforceable contract with Sally, what remedies, if any, does she have? Discuss.
?25

Barbara v. Sally
Answer A to Question 3
In order for Barbara to establish there was an enforceable contract she will have to establish there was a valid offer, a valid acceptance, and consideration. Since this subject is the sale of goods, tangible moveable items, the governing law is the UCC.
Was the posting on Facebook a valid offer?
Offer. An offer consists of a present intent by the offeror to be contractually bound by the certain terms of the offer and conveyed to an offeree with reasonable assumption that agreement to those terms would form a bargain/deal.
Here the offeror (Sally) is manifesting the present intent because she expressly states "first person I hear from gets it". A valid offer usually requires identifiable parties, description of the good, quantity, and price, but the UCC does allow for gap fillers when terms are missing, so long as the quantity is stated in the offer. Here the parties are identified as Sally and the offerees as her Facebook friends. The goods are identified because it is a doll and the price is $450, the quantity is one, so therefore there is valid offer.
Was the posting on Sally's Facebook page an acceptance of the offer?
Acceptance. An Offeror is said to be the master of his offer and can expressly limit the terms of acceptance. If there are no express terms stated for acceptance then an offeree may use reasonable means to announce his acceptance. If the offer was mailed to the offeree and no express conditions on acceptance were part of the offer, then the offeree would be able to accept by mailing his response of acceptance back to the offeror. Additionally, under the doctrine of the "mailbox" rule an offer is accepted upon dispatch, provided it is properly addressed, and has the proper postage.
??26

Here the offer did express a limit on the way the offer could be accepted and stated "call me -no Facebook allowed at my job." Therefore the posting of an acceptance on the Facebook page would not be a valid acceptance.
Was the phone call a valid acceptance?
This would be a proper way to accept the offer because the offer clearly stated "Call me", but the offer was no longer available so we must look to see if there was a proper revocation of the offer.
Was there a proper revocation of the offer?
An offeror may revoke an offer prior to acceptance, but must notify previous offerees of the revocation. If an offer is made to the public at large then usually a revocation can be published in the same manner the offer was published (i.e. if the offer was made in the newspaper then a posting in the newspaper that the offer has been revoked will suffice); however, if the offer is made to a certain individual then the offeror must convey the revocation directly to the offeree. In that case, the revocation is effective when the offeree receives the revocation.
Here the original offer was made on Facebook to all of Sally's Facebook Friends, which could be a few or thousands, so the proper way to revoke the offer would be to place a notification that the offer has been revoked. In this case that is what Sally did. Barbra will try to argue that she did accept the offer by posting "I'll take the doll for $450" and under the common law this would be a "mirror image" of acceptance and proper acceptance, but the offer did state "Call me", which apparently Barbara did after Sally posted the revocation. Barbara will argue that Sally would have to have seen her acceptance because, even though Sally said there was no Facebook allowed at her work, she may have posted the revocation during a break when she did have access to Facebook.
27

Barbara's argument will fail because she did not accept the offer in the manner as stated in the offer.
Consideration: As this is a sale of goods, consideration is not an issue because consideration is always present in a sale of goods because the seller is giving up something in return for something of value (usually money).
Conclusion. There is not an enforceable contract because there was not a valid acceptance.
Damages/Remedies. A non-breaching party may seek damages in the form of specific performance. Expectation damages or restitution.
Specific Performance is available when the breaching party is selling unique goods or real estate and monetary damages are inadequate and justice can only be accomplished by enforcement. Here it is possible to get specific performance because an antique doll would be presumed to be rare, even though it appears there seems to be regular sales as indicated by the comment of "one sold on eBay last month for $650", and friends found out an antique dealer stated it was worth $1,500.
Restitution is available to get back to the buyer any value already paid to the seller. In this case there was none so there would not be any restitution available.
Expectation damages attempts to place the buyer in the same position as if the deal had gone through and in this case, it would be to get a doll for $450 that is worth $1500. The expectation damages, assuming that Barbara was going to resell the doll, would be the difference between the contract price and the $1500.
??????????28

Answer B to Question 3
Common Law vs. UCC
UCC governs contracts for the sale of goods. Goods are tangible moveable items. An antique doll is tangible since one can touch and feel it and it is moveable, therefore Sally's antique doll is a good. Since Sally's antique doll is a good, and since the UCC governs the sale of good, the UCC governs in this case.
Merchant
Neither Sally nor Barbara regularly engage in the business of manufacturing, buying, or selling dolls. Thus neither Sally nor Barbara are considered merchants with respect to the sale of Antique Dolls.
Offer
An offer is an outward manifestation to presently enter into a bargain that is communicated. To be specific in terms an offer has to have quantity, time for performance, identify of the parties, price, and subject matter. An offer vests the power of acceptance in an offeree. An offer has to specific in terms. Furthermore, an offer has to be accepted in the manner prescribed by the offeror, if such a manner is provided for in the offer.
Sally's posting on Facebook as an offer
Sally's posting on Facebook was an outward manifestation since it was posted on Facebook and it was communicated since Judy and Barbara saw it, evidence by Judy posting a note that said "The doll is worth way more than you think. Don't sell it" and Barbara left a note stating "I'll take the doll for $450. Barbara". It was an outward manifestation to enter into a bargain since it stated "I'll sell it to any of you for $450", the language used of "sell" indicates a willingness to presently enter into a bargain.
Specific Terms:
Quantity - Here Sally's posting was for one antique doll that she inherited, thus there is quantity.
????29

Time for Performance - Here Sally's posting stated "First person I hear from gets it. Otherwise, after five days, I'll sell it on eBay" Thus time for performance is five days. Thus, there is time for performance.
Identity of the Parties - Here Sally's posting was not specific as to the identity of the parties; however since it was posted on Facebook the parties would be whomever can see the posting. Under the UCC lack of identity of the parties would not invalidate an offer.
Price - Here Sally's posting indicated "I'll sell it to any of you for $450"; thus the price is $450. There is price.
Subject Matter - Here Sally's posting had a photograph of the doll. One would argue that the photograph clearly delineated the subject matter of Sally's posting. Lack of subject matter does not necessarily void an offer under the UCC.
Manner of Acceptance - Here Sally's posting specifically say's "Call me - no Facebook allowed at my job", thus acceptance would have to be via calling Sally.
Sally's posting is likely an offer.
Sally's posting as an advertisement or invitation to offer
Since, Sally's posting was not directed to a specific person and stated "I'll sell it to any of you...." Sally may try to argue that her posting constituted an advertisement which is usually viewed as an invitation to offer and not an actual offer. This argument would likely fail since Sally is not a merchant or in the business of selling dolls such that it is unlikely that she would advertise, and furthermore there is only one doll and not many.
Acceptance
Acceptance is an offeree's unequivocal agreement to be bound by the terms of an offer. An offer has to be accepted in the manner prescribed by the offeror, if such a manner is provided for in the offer.
??30

Barbara's Facebook posting as acceptance.
Here when Barbara posted on Facebook saying, "I'll take the doll for $450, Barbara" it seems to signify Barbara's unequivocal agreement to be bound by the terms of Sally's offer, however since Sally's posting stated "Call me - no Facebook allowed at my job", Sally would argue that her offer specifically provided the manner by which acceptance can be effectuated, by calling and not Facebook, such that Barbara's purported acceptance was not within the manner prescribed by Sally and thus is not effective. Barbara's acceptance on Facebook is not a proper acceptance of Sally's offer.
Barbara's call to Sally as acceptance
Here when Barbara called Sally and said "This is Barbara, and I'll buy the doll for $450" this signified Barbara's unequivocal agreement to be bound by the terms of Sally's offer and was within the manner prescribed by Sally, since Barbara called Sally. If Sally's offer was still open then Barbara's call to Sally likely resulted in a valid acceptance by Barbara of Sally's offer - see below on withdrawal of offer.
Sally's withdrawal of her offer
Although Sally's offer appears to indicated that she will hold it open for five days since she said "First person I hear from gets it. Otherwise, after five days, I'll sell it on eBay". Since Sally is not a merchant her offer is not a firm offer and is therefore revocable unless the option to hold it open is supported by consideration. Since Sally received no consideration from Barbara to hold her offer open, her offer is revocable any time prior to acceptance. An offer is generally revocable prior to acceptance. Here the facts do not state whether Sally's new note on Facebook stating "Thanks for the information, Judy. The doll is going straight to eBay" came before or after Barbara's call (see above). To the extent the note was posted before Barbara called Sally it likely constituted a effective withdrawal of Sally's offer. To the extent that the note was posted after Barbara had already called and accepted Sally's offer, Sally would not be able to withdraw her offer subsequent to acceptance.
???31

Even if Sally's new note was posted prior to Barbara's acceptance, Barbara would argue that she did not received the withdrawal prior to her acceptance and argue that withdrawal of an offer is only valid upon receipt, however since Sally's withdrawal was communicated in the same manner as her offer she would argue that her withdrawal was effective when it was posted.
Consideration
Consideration is something of value. Here the doll is something of value and $450 is also something of value, as such there is valid consideration.
Barbara entered into an enforceable contract with Sally if Sally did not effectively withdraw her offer prior to Barbara's call accepting Sally's offer.
Unilateral Mistake
Although a unilateral mistake doesn't excuse performance, however if the non-mistaken party knows of the mistaken parties mistake, the mistaken party can void the contract. To the extent Barbara has an enforceable contract with Sally, Sally could argue that Barbara knew that Sally was making a mistake with respect to the value of the doll since Judy posted, "The doll is worth way more than you think. Don't sell it", and because Barbara had found out from a local antique dealer that the doll was worth $1,500. If Sally is successful in arguing that Barbara knew of Sally's mistake then Sally would be able to void the contract.
Monetary Damages
Barbara could ask for monetary damages in the amount of the difference between the fair market value of the doll and the selling price of $450.
Specific Performance
Alternatively Barbara could request specific performance by Sally. Specific performance is usually available when the subject matter is unique, here since the doll is antique and one of a kind it is likely unique such that Barbara could request the remedy of Specific Performance whereby Sally would have to tender to Barbara the doll for $450.
????32

QUESTION 4
In a series of nighttime burglaries, a burglar broke into houses when the owners were away and stole items of value. The burglar ate cookies found at each house and therefore became known as the "cookie bandit."
Wanting to protect his property and prevent a burglary while he was out of town for the weekend, Dan planned to lace some cookies with cyanide and leave them on his kitchen counter. He believed his plan was lawful because he had been told by a police officer that he could use deadly force to prevent a burglary. He asked his friend Ann to help him obtain cyanide. She tried to talk him out of his plan, but he assured her that it was lawful. She then got him some cyanide. He laced some cookies with it, left them on the kitchen counter, and went out of town for the weekend.
During Dan's absence, his neighbor Jane entered his house, together with her five-year- old son, Victor. Each weekend, Jane cleaned Dan's house. While Jane was cleaning, Victor found the cookies, ate one, and died.
1. With what crimes, if any, can Dan reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
2. With what crimes, if any, can Ann reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can she reasonably raise? Discuss.
?33

Dan (D) Ann (A) Victor (V)
Answer A to Question 4
1. With what crimes, if any, can Dan reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably raise?
Solicitation
The inciting and inducing of another to commit an unlawful act.
When D asked A for her help in obtaining cyanide for the purpose of baking poisonous cookies, which he intended any burglars to eat, he incited A to commit a crime because poisoning another person is not lawful. Even though A initially objected, she did eventually agree and D both incited and induced A to commit an unlawful act.
D will be found guilty of solicitation. Conspiracy
The agreement between two or more people to commit an unlawful act, or to commit a lawful act through unlawful means.
The facts show that D had an intent to poison any burglar who entered his home while he was away and that he enlisted the aid of A to help him accomplish this goal. Because poisoning another human being is not lawful, in addition to the fact that D did so with the knowledge that it would likely cause death, which is also unlawful, D agreed to commit an unlawful act with A.
D will be found guilty of conspiracy.
??34

Pinkerton's Rule
Any crime, which is committed in furtherance of the crime and which is the reasonably foreseeable or probable result of the crimes being committed by the conspirators, will be chargeable to all co-conspirators.
The facts indicate that A and D are co-conspirators and as such D will be held liable for any actions which are taken in furtherance of the crime, or which are the reasonably foreseeable or probable result of the crime, even if they were crimes committed by A.
Homicide of V
The killing of a human being by another human being.
V died after eating D's poisoned cookie.
Causation
D must be both the actual cause and the proximate cause of V's death.
Actual
But for D lacing cookies with cyanide and placing them on his counter, V would not have eaten the cookies and then died.
D is the actual cause of V's death.
Proximate
It was reasonably foreseeable that when D created a poisonous cookie and subsequently placed them in the open in his home, that V could potentially eat one of the cookies and die as a result. D will argue that his home is private and it was unforeseeable that V would be in his home while he was away. However, the facts indicate that Jane, V's mother, cleaned D's home every weekend and thus it was 35
?????
foreseeable that V and his mother would be in D's home and that either of them would eat one of the cookies.
Thus D is the proximate cause of V's death.
Murder
The malicious killing of another with malice aforethought.
Murder may be shown through the intent to kill, the intent to cause serious bodily harm, actions committed with a reckless and wanton disregard for life (a depraved heart), or through the felony murder rule.
First-Degree Murder
First-degree murder may be shown through the specific intent to kill, with premeditation and deliberation, where there is no cooling down period. It may also be shown through the general and special felony rule, or through poison, bombing, or lying in wait.
Here the facts do not provide any information indicating that D had a specific intent to kill V, nor was he in the commission of a felony that was not linked to the death. However, D did intentionally poison the cookies which he then left on the counter with the intent that a burglar would eat one and then die. While there was not a specific intent to kill V, the use of poison with the intent to kill is enough to find D guilty of first- degree murder.
D will be found guilty of first-degree murder. Second- Degree Murder
Any murder which is not murder in the first degree.
???36

If D is not found guilty of first-degree murder, due to a defense, he may still be charged with second-degree murder if it is shown that D acted with a depraved heart, or that he had an intent to kill (regardless of premeditation or deliberation) or cause serious bodily harm. D planned and purchased cyanide, which he then used in the baking of cookies with the knowledge, specific intent and malice to possibly cause the death of another. The fact that D did not intend V to be the person who was killed by his cookies does not excuse the reckless and depraved heart behavior with which D acted.
D will be found guilty of second-degree murder.
Defenses
Voluntary Manslaughter - Mitigation
Voluntary manslaughter is murder which has been mitigated due to possible defenses used by the defendant.
D does not qualify for any mitigation and will not be able to use mitigation. Justification - Defense of Property
A landowner may use deadly force to protect their property, if under a reasonable threat of harm.
D was not present at the time of the killing and was certainly not under a reasonable threat of harm which would be sufficient to warrant the use of deadly force.
D will not be successful in a defense of property defense. Justification - Crime Prevention
Deadly force may be used if it reasonable in the prevention of criminal activity. 37
????
No criminal activity actually took place in D's home. In addition, using poison as a means of protecting your home from a potential burglar would also not be deemed reasonable.
D will not be successful in a crime prevention defense.
Excuse - Mistake of Law
D will argue that he had reliable information from a police officer that his actions were legal and he therefore did not have the requested mens rea to commit the crimes with which he has been charged. However, a mistake of law is not allowed as a valid excuse for the use of deadly force and it will not excuse D's behavior.
D will not be successful in a mistake of law defense. Attempted Murder of Burglars
Murder
Defined supra.
Attempt
A person may be charged with the crime of attempt if it can be shown that the person had the specific intent to commit the crime, that the person had the apparent ability to commit the crime, that the person took steps beyond preparation and began the perpetration of the crime, and that due to a factual rather than just a legal impossibility, the crime was not completed.
Specific Intent
When D discussed his plan with A and told her that he was permitted to defend his home with deadly force and was going to, therefore, bake deadly cookies, it is shown
????38

that he had the specific intent to commit the crime of murder.
Apparent Ability
D did effectively kill a person with the cookies he had intended for the burglars. D therefore had the apparent ability to commit murder.
Preparation versus Perpetration
D took the steps in preparation, as well as actually committing, the crime of murder, thus actually attempting to perpetrate the crime of murder.
Factual Impossibility
The reason that the murder of the burglars was not committed was due to a factual impossibility. The burglars did not show up to Dan's home, making it factually impossible for them to eat the cookies he had poisoned for them. This factual impossibility does not excuse D from the attempted murder.
D meets all the requirements of attempt and will be found guilty of attempted murder of the burglars.
2. With what crimes, if any, can Ann reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can she reasonable raise? Discuss.
Conspiracy
Discussed and defined supra.
A will be found guilty of conspiracy.
Pinkerton's Rule
Any crime, which is committed in furtherance of the conspiracy, or which is the
??39

reasonably foreseeable or probable result of the crimes being committed by the conspirators, will be chargeable to all co-conspirators.
The facts indicate that A and D are co-conspirators and, as such, A will be held liable for any actions which are taken in furtherance of the crime, or which are the reasonable, foreseeable, or probable result of the crime, even if they were crimes committed by D.
Accomplice Liability
When it can be shown that a person has taken a substantial step in the aiding, abetting, or the active assistance of a criminal act, that person may be held liable under, accomplice liability, for the crimes committed by the actual perpetrator.
When A agreed to help D by acquiring the cyanide he required to commit the crime of murder, she actively assisted him in the commission of that crime. A will be held liable for the actual perpetration of the crime.
?40

STATE v. DAN SOLICITATION
Answer B to Question 4
Solicitation is the enticing, encouraging, and requesting another to commit an unlawful act, with the intent that the crime be committed.
Since there had been a rash of burglaries in the area while owners were away, Dan wanted to protect his home while he was going to be away. The bandit would eat cookies found at the homes and, therefore, had become known as the cookie bandit. Dan decided he was going to lace some cookies with cyanide, and leave them on the counter while he was gone, and asked Ann if should could help him obtain cyanide. By asking Ann to help obtain the cyanide, he was soliciting her help. He was requesting her to help him commit the unlawful act of placing poison in the cookies for the burglars to eat.
Conspiracy is an agreement between two or more people to commit an unlawful act. At common law it also required that a step be taken in furtherance of the conspiracy.
When Dan asked Ann to help him obtain cyanide, and she agreed to help him obtain some, there was an agreement. In addition, he had told Ann why he wanted the cyanide, to lace some cookies he planned to leave on his counter while he was gone, just in case the bandit burglarized his house while he was gone. By planning to poison someone, he was intending to commit the unlawful act of murder or battery at the least.
When she got the cyanide, there was a step in furtherance of the conspiracy. Therefore, Dan can be charged with conspiracy.
41

HOMICIDE
Homicide is the killing of a human being by another human being.
Vic died as a result of eating the poisoned cookies that Dan prepared.
Thus a killing occurred.
ACTUAL CAUSE
But for Dan putting cyanide in the cookies, Vic would not have died.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Vic died as a direct result of eating the poisoned cookies. It is foreseeable that if poison is placed in cookies and someone eats them, he could die.
Therefore, Dan was the proximate cause of Vic's death. MURDER
Murder is defined as the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought.
Malice aforethought is established through a desired intent to kill, a desire to cause serious bodily injury, reckless and wonton conduct, and felony murder.
Vic died as a result of eating the cookies laced with cyanide. Thus, there was an unlawful killing.
The State will argue that when Dan decided to lace the cookies with cyanide, knowing that ingesting cyanide can cause death, he was showing his desired intent that he wanted the person to eat the cookie to die.
42

The State can also argue that Dan knew that cyanide was poison, and even if death didn't result a person could become seriously ill. Therefore, it shows his intent to cause a serious bodily injury.
The State will also argue that, by placing cyanide in a cookie that someone might eat, shows a conscious disregard for human life. Therefore, the state can show he was showing a depraved heart.
Malice has been established. Dan can be charged with murder. FIRST-DEGREE MURDER
First-degree murder requires that there be premeditation and deliberation, or felony murder. It can also be found if the state proves that there was, the use of poison, lying in wait, bombing or terrorism.
The State will argue that when Dan decided to make the cookies and lace them with cyanide, he was premeditating or contemplating, how the killing should take place. Deliberation is a way of showing the death was coldblooded, that it was calculated. In deciding to lace the cookies, Dan calculated how he could best get at the burglars. The fact that it was Vic who ate the cookies doesn't change the fact that the death was premeditated.
In addition, the state will also argue that Dan used Cyanide to poison the cookies. Thus, the killing was a result of poison because Vic ate the poisoned cookies.
TRANSFERRED INTENT
Dan will argue that he never intended to kill Vic. He made the cookies with the idea that, if the cookie bandit came, he would be the one eating the cookies.
43

However, the State will counter that although Dan intended the cookies for the cookie bandit, his intent to harm would be transferred to the actual victim, Vic.
Therefore, Dan can be charged with first-degree murder.
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER
Second-degree murder is all murder not found to be first-degree murder.
If the State cannot prove first-degree murder, it will request the court to give second degree.
DEFENSES
DEFENSE OF PROPERTY
One may use reasonable force to protect one's property.
Dan will argue that he knew that burglars were hitting homes when the residents were gone and therefore, he was merely trying to protect his home from would be thieves.
The State will counter, that by using poison, Dan used unreasonable force to protect his property. Poison would be considered deadly force and that is never appropriate for defending property.
This defense will fail.
CRIME PREVENTION
One may use reasonable force to prevent a crime.
44

Dan will argue again that he knew that burglars were hitting homes when the residents were gone, therefore, he was merely trying to prevent a crime from occurring.
The State will counter that by using poison, Dan used unreasonable force to prevent the crime. Poison would be considered deadly force and that is never appropriate for crime prevention unless there is a serious felony actively being committed and lives are at stake.
MISTAKE OF LAW
Mistake can be a defense to a specific intent crime. As such, first-degree murder is a specific intent crime.
Dan will argue that he had been told by a police officer that he could use deadly force to prevent a burglary. Dan will argue that he made his determination based on that conversation.
The State will argue that deadly force is acceptable if there is an imminent threat to life and safety, but Dan wasn't even going to be home; therefore, there was no reason to use deadly force. He was protecting property, not himself.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
An unintended killing without malice aforethought.
Dan will argue that his actions may have been criminally negligent, but that he never intended to kill Vic. He completely forgot that Jane came to clean his house, and then Jane often brought her son with her. His actions may have been wrong, but he never intended to kill Vic.
His request will fail. He may be able to get it reduced from first to second-degree murder, but this would be doubtful.
45

BATTERY
Is the placing for force upon another with the intent to cause a harmful or offensive touching.
When Dan placed the poison in the cookies, he intended by his volitional act of placing the poison in the mixture, to cause a harmful touching. The poison would cause death or serious injury; therefore it would be offensive.
STATE v. ANN
CONSPIRACY
Defined and discussed supra
PINKERTON'S RULE
A co-conspirator can be liable for all crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Since Ann is a co-conspirator, and she was fully aware of what Dan's plans were, she can be charged with
Homicide -defined and discussed supra
Murder - defined and discussed supra
First Degree - defined and discussed supra
Second Degree -defined and discussed supra Involuntary Manslaughter - defined and discussed supra.
46

Battery - defined and discussed supra.
ACCOMPLICE
An accomplice is someone who aids or abets another to commit an unlawful act.
Ann can be charged as an accessory before the fact. By obtaining the cyanide for Dan to aid him in preparing the cookies, she gave aid before the act was done. She knew what he planned to do, and by giving aid showed her intent that the crime be committed.
As an accomplice, she can be liable for all foreseeable crimes that result from the unlawful act.
Modernly, she can only be found liable for the intended crimes that resulted. MISTAKE OF LAW
Mistake of law is never a defense to a crime.
Ann will argue that she tried to talk him out of it, but Dan had assured her that his act of poisoning the cookies was lawful because he had talked with a police officer. Even if it comes from a police officer if it is wrong, it is wrong.
Mistake of law would not be a valid defense.
47



?Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2013
California First-Year Law Students' Examination

?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 845 S. Figueroa Street . Los Angeles, CA 90017-2515 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS OCTOBER 2013 FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the four essay questions from the October 2013 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers received high grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were produced as submitted by the applicant, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. They are reproduced here with the consent of their authors.
???Question Number 1.
2. 3. 4.
Subject 
Contracts
Criminal Law 
Contracts
T orts
??
October 2013 ESSAY QUESTIONS
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all 4 questions.
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines that are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?
QUESTION 1
Olivia is a florist who specializes in roses. She has a five-year written contract with Juan to sell him as many roses as he needs for his wedding chapel. Over the past three years, Olivia sold Juan between 300 and 1,500 dozen roses annually. Although two years remain on the contract, Juan has just notified Olivia that he cannot continue to buy roses from her because of serious budget concerns.
Last month, Ann emailed Olivia an order for "1,000 white stems" to decorate an event hall, specifying no particular price or flower. Ann assumed that Olivia would send roses, her specialty, but Olivia instead sent orchids, the only "white stems" available at the time. When Ann received the white orchids, she was surprised, but had no time to inquire about substitutes. As a result, she used the orchids for the event. When Olivia subsequently billed Ann $5 per stem for the orchids, a price twice that of roses, Ann refused to pay the higher amount.
1. What contract rights and remedies, if any, does Olivia have against Juan? Discuss. 2. What contract rights and remedies, if any, does Olivia have against Ann? Discuss.

Olivia vs. Juan
Governing Law
QUESTION 1 - SELECTED ANSWER A
?UCC governs contracts involving the sale of goods. Goods are movable tangible objects at the time of contract formation. In this case, the item involved was the sale of roses. Roses are movable tangible objects.
Thus the UCC governs this contract.
Merchants
A merchant is one who has special knowledge or skill of the goods involved in the contract or regularly deals with the goods of this kind.
Olivia is a florist who specializes in roses. This shows she regularly deals with the sale of roses, the goods involved in the contract. Thus, Olivia will constitute a merchant.
Juan and Olivia entered into a five year contract to sell him as many roses as he needs for his wedding chapel. Since Juan wants the contract for five years, and a wedding chapel typically purchases roses for funerals, weddings, or mass schedules, Juan will be considered a merchant.
Hence, both parties are merchants.

Mutual Assent
Mutual assent consists of an offer and an acceptance.
Olivia and Juan entered into a five year contract to sell him as many roses as he needs for his wedding chapel. The facts do not state which party presented the offer or the acceptance, but it is clear that the parties came to a mutual agreement for Olivia to sell Juan about 300 to 1500 dozen roses annually for the next five years and, as such, Juan will pay the price for those deliveries.
Thus there is mutual assent to show there was an intent to enter into a contract.
Consideration
Consideration is bargain for exchange between the parties in which one party incurs a legal detriment and the other a legal benefit.
Olivia incurred the detriment of delivering the specified flowers to Juan annually. She incurred the benefit of receiving payment for the roses that were delivered.
Juan incurred the detriment of paying Olivia for the flowers and Juan incurred the benefit of receiving the specified flowers from Olivia.
Juan will argue that since the exact quantity is not specified in the contract that it is simply illusory and cannot illustrate that there was consideration to bind both parties.
However, under a requirements contract, as illustrated below, the requirements contracts are not illusory so long as the goods delivered are capable of being made, regardless if the exact quantity is not stated.
Thus there is valid consideration.

Requirements Contract
A requirements contract is where the buyer promises to buy from the seller all the goods the buyer requires and the seller in turn promises to deliver all that the buyer requires.
Olivia and Juan entered into a five year contract to sell "as many roses as he needs for his wedding chapel." Olivia promises to deliver all that Juan requires and Juan promises to purchase all that he requires from Olivia. Although the exact quantity is not stated, the contract will still be enforceable since it is capable of being made since the agreement was made in good faith.
Hence, this is an enforceable requirements contract.
Statute of Frauds
Where certain contracts must be evidenced in writing in order to be enforceable and signed by the parties to be bound.
The contract entered into by Juan and Olivia was for the sale of roses, which is a good. Since Olivia delivered approximately 300 to 1500 dozen roses annually it established that the goods exceed the price of $500. This must be evidenced in writing as it was.
Also, since the contract was for five years, it cannot be performed in one year and must be evidenced in a writing, which it was when they entered into a written contract.
Hence, Statute of Frauds applies and is satisfied.
Constructive Condition Precedent
Where an act must offer before another party's performance becomes due.

Here, Olivia must deliver the roses to Juan before Juan has the duty to pay for the roses that were delivered.
Hence a condition precedent exists.
Impossibility
Where a party's performance becomes objectively impossible due to an unforeseen circumstance that occurs.
Juan will attempt to argue that his duty for the remaining two years should be discharged since he incurred serious budget concerns that affected his ability to perform.
Olivia will counter-argue that it is commonly foreseeable with those buying and selling flowers that budget concerns may arise and that issues with payment are possible, but that since it was reasonably foreseeable it should not cut off Juan's liability and duty under the contract. Olivia will also state that it was not objectively impossible for Juan to perform since he simply incurred some budget cuts and could still find a way to make payment.
Therefore, no valid impossibility defense.
Impracticability
Where a party's performance becomes impracticable due to an unforeseen event that neither party could foresee.
Juan will argue that his performance has become impracticable because of changes in his economic situation. He will attempt to argue that it was not foreseeable that he

would incur such budget cuts since he had no problem the previous three years of the contract.
However Olivia will argue that increases in prices or budget changes are reasonably foreseeable and that although it might be more difficult for Juan to make payments he is still obligated to perform because his economic impracticability was anticipated.
Thus no valid impracticability defense.
Frustration of Purpose
Where a party's purpose for entering into a contract has become frustrated due to an unforeseen event that was not anticipated by either party and both parties have knowledge of the other's purpose.
Juan will state that he only wanted to enter into an agreement with Olivia so long as he could afford the shipment of roses and now that he is incurring budget concerns his purpose for entering the contract was frustrated. Juan will argue that he was not aware that he would incur such difficulty because he had been able to perform the past three years and could not foresee that it would affect the contract the remaining two years.
Olivia will counter-argue that Olivia was never informed of Juan's purpose of entering into a contract so long as he could afford the payments. It was not made known to Olivia; thus she had no knowledge of his purpose when entering into the contract. Also the difficulty with payment and budget concerns is reasonably foreseeable in the sale of roses.
Thus no valid frustration of purpose defense.

Anticipatory Repudiation
Where a party expressly repudiates the contract saying they will not perform when performance becomes due and the injured party may immediately bring suit.
Juan just notified Olivia, when two years remained in the contract, that he cannot continue to buy roses from her because of serious budget concerns.
Juan's notifying Olivia is a clear expression through his words that he will no longer perform when his performance becomes due.
Thus Juan anticipatorily repudiated the contract and Olivia may bring suit to recover.
Voluntary Disablement
Where a party through their conduct illustrates that they will no longer perform when performance becomes due.
Juan stopped ordering and making payments for Olivia's delivery. Thus his stopping of his orders illustrates through his conduct that he will no longer perform.
Hence, Juan voluntarily disabled himself.
Substantial Performance
Where a party substantially performs their part of the contract, the injured party is entitled to compensation.
The contract with Olivia and Juan was to deliver roses for Juan's wedding chapel between 300 to 1500 dozen roses annually for the next five years. Olivia had

performed three years of the contract, with only two years remaining. Therefore, she substantially performed her end of the bargain and Juan will be liable for continued payments and compensation for his breach to Olivia.
Breach
An unjustified failure to perform an essential part of the bargain.
Juan and Olivia had a contract for five years where Olivia was to deliver 300 to 1500 dozen roses annually. Since the contract was for five years, any failure on
either party to perform is a breach.
Juan notified Olivia that he would no longer perform. Juan had no valid defense for his failure to perform; thus it was unjustified because budget cuts and economic issues with payment are reasonably foreseeable. Since Olivia performed a substantial part of the contract for three years, Juan committed a breach and Olivia is entitled to damages resulting from the breach.
Remedies Expectation Damage
Where a party is entitled to any expectation damages that result from the party's unjustified breach.
Olivia expected to receive payment from Juan for each delivery for the remaining two years. Since Juan breached his part to pay for the roses, Olivia is entitled to expectation damages and what she expected to receive from the contract with Juan.

Cover Cost
A cover is when a seller resells the goods to another buyer and if the sale price is less than the contract price with the breaching party, the seller is entitled to a cover cost.
Since Olivia mitigated her damages by selling the roses to Ann, she will be entitled to any restitution in cover costs if there is a difference in contract price for the sale of the roses with Juan versus the contract with Ann.
Lost Volume Seller
Where a seller has a large volume of goods and resells the goods for a different price due to a breach, the seller is entitled to compensation for making or the wholesale price minus the resale price.
Olivia is entitled to any lost profit she lost as a lost volume seller since she specialized in roses and sold dozens of them. Olivia is entitled to any lost profits as a result of Juan's breach.
Since the exact amount of damages is not specified since the roses delivered ranged from 300 to 1500 dozen, the court will most likely look at the reasonable average amount that was delivered to Juan, prior to the breach to determine the contract price in regards to damages.
Therefore, Olivia is entitled to the contract price for the remaining two years, or since she mitigated her damages she is entitled to the contract price minus the resale price of the roses for the remaining two years with the contract with Juan.

Olivia vs. Ann
Governing Law
UCC governs the sale of goods.
Roses constitute goods and thus the UCC governs this contract.
Merchants
Merchants regularly deal with goods involved in the contract.
As discussed above, Olivia is a merchant since she regularly deals with the sale of roses and other flowers.
Ann ordered "1000 white stems" to decorate an event hall. The facts do not specify if she regularly deals with the sale of roses; however judging by the excess amount of flowers ordered and since it is for the purpose of decorating an event hall, it can be inferred that Ann is a merchant as well and regularly deals with the sale of roses.
Offer
An offer is a manifestation of intent to enter into a bargain that contains definite and certain terms and is communicated to the offeree.
Ann emailed Olivia an order. Ann's conduct of emailing illustrates through her conduct that she intended to be bound by the offer. The offer stated 1000 white stems to decorate an event hall. The quantity is there, representing 1000. The time was not specified but can be assumed to mean a reasonable time. The subject matter is "white stems." The price is not stated but according to the UCC gap fillers will be applied for
?
course of dealing, course of performance, or usage of trade, to provide a price for the white stems. Ann emailed Olivia, who is the offeree.
Thus there is a valid offer made by Ann.
Acceptance
Under the UCC an acceptance is permitted in any reasonable manner or medium.
Thus Olivia's shipment of the orchids will constitute an acceptance through her conduct of delivering them.
Shipment of Nonconforming Goods
Where a seller ships nonconforming goods and does not illustrate it was an accommodation is in breach.
Ann will argue that under the UCC, any shipment of nonconforming goods without notifying that it is offered as an accommodation is breach. Ann will state that since Olivia delivered "orchids" and not "roses," which she had presumed since Olivia "specializes in roses", and since it is nonconforming and there is no notice it is offered as an accommodation, that Olivia breached.
Olivia will argue that the term "1000 white stems" is ambiguous and therefore left Olivia to believe she wanted whatever white stems were available. Thus her shipment does indicate a valid acceptance but since the term "white stems" is ambiguous, infra, Olivia will have a valid claim that Ann is still entitled to pay for the "white stems" since she accepted the goods and did not give any notice of her dissatisfaction or concern with what was delivered.

Consideration Defined Supra
Olivia incurred the detriment to deliver the flowers and she incurred the benefit of being paid for the delivery to Ann.
Ann incurred the benefit of receiving the white stems and Ann incurred the detriment to pay for the white stems delivered by Olivia.
Thus valid consideration.
Statute of Frauds -- Sale of Goods over $500
A contract must be evidenced in writing and signed by the party to be bound in order to be enforceable when dealing with the sale of goods over $500.
Here, the email sent by Ann stated that she wanted 1000 white stems. Because the quantity is so large and since Olivia later stated that it was $5 per stem, it is indicative that the sale of goods over $500 was involved. Hence it needed to be evidenced by a writing.
Ann will argue there is no enforceable contract because it was not in one complete writing, but only partial writings and thus both parties did not sign it.
Exception -- Substantial Performance
Where a party substantially performs the essence of the bargain.

Olivia will argue that although it is not one complete writing and that it was not signed by Olivia, the fact that she substantially performed takes the sale of the goods over $500 out of the statute of frauds. Also since Ann accepted the flowers, regardless if she had no time to inquire about the substitute, she still accepted and thus Olivia substantially performed and is entitled to payment.
Unilateral Mistake
Where a party is mistaken about a material fact of the contract.
Ann will argue that she was mistaken as to the term "white stems" as well as the fact that she did not know the price would be $5 per stem. Ann will state that she should not pay the amount because she was unilaterally mistaken.
However, Olivia will argue that the term "white stems" was ambiguous and that even if it was not what Ann ordered, she accepted the shipment and thus is liable for payment.
Hence, no unilateral mistake.
Ambiguity
Where a term in the contract has more than one meaning the court will usually allow evidence to establish the meaning.
Ann will argue that the term "white stems" was specific to roses since Olivia specializes in roses and she expected to pay for roses but received orchids.
However, Olivia will bring into evidence that "white stems" was ambiguous but in the course of performance or trade usage that "white stems" also refers to orchids as well. Also, if Ann did not want to accept the orchids she could have rejected the shipment but

since she did not object within a reasonable time or state dissatisfaction, she is obligated to perform.
Also the court will provide any gap fillers as well as outside evidence of course of performance and trade usage to support Olivia's claim.
Duress
Where a party enters into a contract because they are left with no other reasonable alternative.
Ann will attempt to argue that she accepted the orchids because she had no time to inquire about substitutes and needed it for the event hall. She will state she was left with no other alternative but to accept the orchids and thus should not be liable to pay for them since she did not have another choice.
However, this will not be a valid defense, because Ann could have argued that it was not what she had ordered and she also could have specified what she wanted in her offer. Since it was ambiguous as to "white stems" and she accepted the shipment, the defense of duress is not applicable since other reasonable options in handling the situation were available.
Thus no valid duress defense for Ann.
Constructive Condition Precedent Defined Supra
The condition was that Olivia was to deliver the white stems before Ann had a duty to pay.

Since Olivia delivered the white stems, Ann now has a duty to pay. Thus valid condition precedent.
Breach
Defined Supra
Olivia delivered the white stems as requested by Ann. Since Olivia already performed, she was entitled to receive payment for the roses. Thus since Ann is refusing to pay the higher amount for the orchids, Ann has committed an unjustified breach since she accepted the shipment without any objection.
Thus Ann committed a material breach when her performance was due and Olivia is entitled to compensation.
Remedy
Defined Supra
Since Olivia delivered the white stems that she had available, and since the court will most likely apply the UCC gap fillers for the "white stem" price and if it is a reasonable $5 per stem, Ann will be required to pay the amount.
Ann accepted the goods without objecting and did not note that she was dissatisfied or that it was nonconforming. Even if the price was higher than she expected, she still accepted the orchids knowing that Olivia expected to be paid.
Thus Olivia is entitled to the payment of $5 per stem.

QUESTION 1 - SELECTED ANSWER B OLIVIA v. JUAN
CONTRACT DEFINITION
A set of promises between two or more people wherein the law states performance is a duty, and the breach of which provides a remedy. A valid contract consists of an offer, acceptance, and consideration with no viable defenses.
APPLICABLE LAW
The Common Law governs contracts for the sale of land and for services. The UCC governs contracts for the sale of movable goods.
Here, we are dealing with a contract for the sale of roses, which are movable goods, and therefore, the UCC will govern.
MERCHANTS
A merchant is one who regularly deals with the types of goods involved in the contract, or who holds themself out to be knowledgeable about the goods. When the parties are both merchants, they are held to a reasonable standard of good faith and fair dealing.
Here, we are dealing with two merchants. Olivia is a florist specializing in roses, and Juan is the owner of a wedding chapel. Both are considered merchants.
?
CONTRACT FORMATION
OFFER
The offeror is master of the offer, and provides for the acceptance by the offeree. An offer is the intent to be bound by definite terms.
ACCEPTANCE
The UCC requires that the acceptance be of mutual assent by the parties involved. Whenever possible, the UCC will strive to see a formation of a contract to benefit all parties.
CONSIDERATION
Consideration is the bargained-for exchange and legal detriment of all parties.
Here, we are informed that there is a valid five-year written contract between Olivia and Juan. We are also informed that the contract involved is for Olivia to sell Juan all the roses he needs for his wedding chapel, which indicates the parties are involved in a Requirements / Outputs contractual agreement.
Where parties agree to provide all the requirements or purchase all the outputs of the products of the other party, the good faith and fair dealing will suffice as proper consideration for the contract. The amount of the quantity will be proportional on a regular basis as agreed by both parties, with no major variances in the quantities.

Therefore, we will proceed with determining any breach, appropriate defenses or remedies for the parties.
STATUTE OF FRAUDS
The statute of frauds requires certain contracts to be in writing and signed by the party to be charged in order to be enforceable.
The types of contracts involved are:
Contracts for the sale of goods of $500 or more. Contracts for the sale of land.
Contracts for the executorship/suretyship/administration. Contracts for marriage.
Contracts that cannot be performed in one year.
Here, the contract is a five-year contract and is for goods that will most likely cost more than $500.
Therefore, because we are told we have a written contract, the contract satisfies the Statute of Frauds.
PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES / ISSUES WITH PERFORMANCE
Financial Impracticability
When a party is faced with financial difficulty that will no longer allow them to perform their agreed duties, the law may allow for the contract to be ended, voided or nullified.

Here, Juan contacted Olivia at the end of their 3rd year of their contract, and he informed Olivia that he is no longer able to buy roses from Olivia because of serious budget concerns. If Juan's business is in financial difficulty to the extent that he can no longer pay for roses or other items necessary to run his chapel, Juan may be able to prove his financial distress. However, if Juan's business finances are not in serious distress, he will still be obligated to perform his duties to Olivia for his part of the performance of their contract.
Therefore, Juan may or may not be able to claim Financial Impracticability to avoid the remaining two years of his contract with Olivia.
BREACH OF CONTRACT
Anticipatory Repudiation
Anticipatory Repudiation occurs when one party expressly or impliedly acts to avoid or state their inability to perform under the contract.
Here, when Juan contacted Olivia and stated he could not continue to buy roses from her, he Anticipatorily Repudiated his performance of the contract.
Olivia may at that time immediately elect to sue for breach of contract, or she may wait until Juan is scheduled to order his next shipment of roses.
Therefore, Juan will be liable to Olivia for breach of contract by Anticipatory Repudiation.

Requirements and Outputs Contracts
Requirements and Outputs Contracts require the parties to perform in good faith and fair dealing. The amount of goods transacted must be a proportional amount with no great variances. Any major variances will be viewed as a breach.
Here, Olivia agreed to sell Juan as many roses as Juan needed for his chapel. Over three years, Juan bought between 300 and 1,500 dozen roses annually from Olivia. There seems to be a large discrepancy between 300 and 1,500 dozen over a year time period. Olivia has proven that she is able and willing to provide for most likely any amount of roses Juan needs.
Therefore, if Juan can no longer purchase his roses from Olivia, and Juan does not have a viable excuse or defense, Juan will be in breach of his contract with Olivia.
REMEDIES
Mitigation
Olivia must mitigate her damages, and if she has an overstock of roses that Juan will no longer purchase.
Incidentals
If Olivia makes arrangements for a specific and proportionate stock of roses for Juan, Juan will be liable for any incidental expenses to Olivia for maintaining the roses, or perhaps for loss of roses because of overstocking, for the remaining two years.

Expectation
Olivia will be entitled to expectation damages, as she and Juan were under a binding Requirements and Outputs contract. Olivia would be entitled to damages for the roses she expected to sell to Juan but that Juan did not purchase for the remaining two years.
Difference in Contract Price V. Market Price
Olivia will be entitled to the difference in their contract price with Juan and the current market or resale price if she is forced to sell the roses at a lesser price before they die.
OLIVIA v. ANN
CONTRACT DEFINITION. Supra.
MERCHANTS
Here, Olivia is a merchant, and we assume that Ann is not a merchant, but a one-time consumer.
Therefore, Olivia will be held to a higher standard to perform with good faith and fair dealing.
CONTRACT FORMATION. Supra.
?Offer. Supra.

The UCC will require the contract to include a minimum of: The parties involved
Quantity of goods
Here, Ann emailed Olivia an order for "1,000 white stems", but did not specify a price or type of flower. Ann assumed Olivia would send roses, which were her specialty, but Olivia sent orchids instead.
Acceptance. Supra.
Mutual Assent. Supra.
Here, Ann and Olivia were not on the same page for the type of flowers preferred by
Ann. However, Olivia did send flowers.
Nonconforming Goods
When the seller sends nonconforming goods, the buyer can do one of any of the following:
Buyer may refuse the goods;
Buyer may accept the goods;
Buyer may accept some of the goods and return the remaining. Here, the order did not specify the type of flower to be sent.
Ann received the white orchids and was surprised, but had no time to inquire about substitutes. Ann used the orchids for the event.

Therefore, because Ann accepted and did not inquire or contact Olivia in any way to refuse the orchids, Ann will be viewed as accepting the flowers.
Consideration. Supra.
Here, initially, Ann ordered "1,000 white stems" from Olivia, and Olivia shipped white
stems to Ann. We have the minimum requirement of the good and the quantity.
Therefore, both parties bargained for an exchange of flowers for payment, and there is valid consideration.
Statute of Frauds. Supra.
If the amount of the order for 1,000 white stems of orchids or roses amounts to $500 or more, the contract must be in writing and signed by the party to be charged in order to be enforceable.
Here, Olivia billed Ann $5 per stem, for a total of $5,000 for the flowers. The contract between Olivia and Ann must be in writing and signed by Ann, to be enforceable under the Statute of Frauds.
Therefore, the contract was an email, but not signed by Ann; the contract will not be enforceable under the SOF.
DEFENSES
Mistake

Ann may claim that she made a mistake by not stating "roses" in the order, but that because Olivia was a rose specialist, Ann assumed Olivia would deliver roses and not orchids. This will fail because Ann used the flowers without contacting Olivia for sending the incorrect flower.
Misunderstanding
Olivia may claim that she made a mistake and sent the wrong flower. This will fail because the only "white stems" available at the time of Ann's order were orchids and not roses.
Ambiguity
A contract may be voided when the terms of the offer and acceptance are ambiguous. Here, the type of flower was not specified.
Therefore, the contract may be voided due to ambiguity.
BREACH
Major
When a party performs their duty under the agreement, and the other party does not perform, either by performance or payment of goods, a major breach has occurred.
Here, Ann refused to pay $5,000 to Olivia for the flowers. Therefore, Ann breached her duty to pay Olivia.

Perfect Tender Rule
When a party performs by delivering the goods under the contract, they have
performed under the "perfect tender rule". If the other party does not perform or deliver the goods or payment exactly as stated, they have breached their duty.
Here, Olivia will claim she delivered 1,000 white stems to Ann, yet Ann did not perform by paying her. This claim will fail because the perfect tender of the type of flowers was not stated in the original agreement or offer.
REMEDIES
Expectation.
Olivia may be entitled to the $5,000 in payment from Ann because Ann used the flowers and never disputed the type of flower sent. Ann never contacted Olivia to inquire or request the roses be sent, or to clarify the specific type of flower she wanted.

QUESTION 2
Alma believed that Ed, her employer, had cheated her out of overtime pay. She asked her friend, Bob, a locksmith, to open a locked drawer in Ed's desk so that she could obtain confidential documents for use in embarrassing Ed into paying her what she thought he owed her. Bob said he would help her.
Alma took Bob to Ed's office, where he opened the locked desk drawer. Just after Alma and Bob had removed the confidential documents from the drawer, Ed came into the office. Startled, he chased Bob onto a balcony and pushed him. Bob fell over the balcony railing and landed on Diane, who was walking on the sidewalk below. Bob was unharmed but Diane died instantly.
1. With what crimes, if any, can Alma reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can she reasonably raise? Discuss.
2. Withwhatcrimes,ifany,canBobreasonablybecharged,andwhatdefenses,ifany, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.
3. With what crimes, if any, can Ed reasonably be charged, and what defenses, if any, can he reasonably raise? Discuss.

QUESTION 2 - SELECTED ANSWER A
1. ALMA'SCRIMES
Alma's Solicitation of Burglary, or In the Alternative Larceny, and Extortion, Merges with the Target Crimes.
Solicitation is the act of requesting, demanding, or encouraging the commission of a specific crime not already planned by another, whether they agree or not. If the target crime is committed, it merges with that charge. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma "asked her friend, Bob, a locksmith, to open a locked drawer in Ed's desk" in Ed's office for purposes of stealing confidential documents to use for her planned extortion. Causation is met because had she not requested Bob's help, the solicitation would not have occurred. Alma is guilty of solicitation, but because the target crimes were committed, it merges, and she will not be charged with solicitation.
Alma's Conspiracy to Commit Burglary, or In the Alternative Larceny, and Extortion, Does not Merge with the Target Crimes.
Conspiracy is the act of agreeing with one or more other people to commit a specific crime or series of crimes with the intent to make such agreement where at least one party believes there is an agreement (in most jurisdictions) and a co-conspirator has made an overt act, including minor preparation, in furtherance of the conspiracy (again in most jurisdictions).
Bob agreed with Alma to break into Ed's drawer for Alma's extortion purposes when he "said he would help her"; Alma intended to make an agreement to commit a crime, did make such agreement, and her actions when she took Bob to Ed's office meet the overt act and show she believed there was such agreement. Causation is met because she would not have entered the agreement had she not asked Bob for help in the commission of a crime. Alma is guilty of conspiracy.
????
Alma May be Guilty of Burglary.
Burglary at common law was the breaking and entering of the dwelling of another at night with intent to commit a felony. Today it is the entering of any structure of another without license with intent to commit a crime at any time of day, whether breaking or not, in most jurisdictions. Both actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma and Bob entered Ed's office, a structure, without license, with the intent to steal confidential documents, a crime. Causation is met because the entering of Ed's office with such intent would not have occurred but for Alma taking Bob there, and the result is not too remote or accidental, meeting both actual and proximate causation (as defined by the MPC).
Alma May be Guilty of Larceny, a Lesser Included Offense of Burglary.
Larceny is the taking away by trespass of the personal property of another with intent to permanently deprive them of possession. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
If not all the elements of Burglary are met, Alma may be charged with larceny, because she and Bob removed the documents from Bob's desk. This analysis may be necessary because Ed is Alma's employer, so entering his office may not have qualified for burglary, if she had license to do so. Causation for larceny is met because the documents would not have been taken had Alma not asked Bob to help her take them and brought him to the scene where they were then taken. However, she certainly did not have license to do so for the purpose of stealing documents, so the license should not be recognized, and burglary most likely will be charged.
??
Alma May be Guilty of Attempted Extortion.
Extortion is a modern crime where possession or title of personal property or money is transferred to the defendant by means of threat. Here, Alma intends to use the confidential documents to threaten Ed with embarrassment, resulting in him paying her money. It is irrelevant that she believes he owes her overtime pay because she is still guilty of the attempt to extort payment by threat of embarrassment. Causation is met because she would not have taken the substantial step toward threatening Ed with embarrassment to get him to give her money if she hadn't entered his office with the intent to steal the documents for this purpose.
Alma is Guilty of Felony Murder if She is Guilty of Burglary, Because Diane's Death is Foreseeable.
Homicide is the act or omission resulting in the death of another human. Involuntary manslaughter is to do so recklessly or grossly negligently; voluntary manslaughter is to do so with intent to kill but adequately provoked by the victim; second-degree murder is to do so with malice aforethought either through reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life or intent to kill (either express or implied), and first-degree murder is to do so with premeditation and deliberation or during the commission of a felony before the defendant has reached safe haven. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma entered Ed's office without license with the intent to commit larceny and/or extortion. This should be sufficient to convict her of burglary. If so, Dianne's death occurred during the course of the burglary when Bob fell on her; she would not have died but for the burglary, and because Ed pushing Bob was a reacting intervening force directly from the burglary itself, her death was not so unforeseeable as to break causation -- it is not too remote or accidental.
ALMA'S DEFENSES
Alma's Defense Against the Agreement of Conspiracy Likely Fails.
????
Alma may claim she merely asked Bob to help her, and is therefore not guilty of the solicitation which merges with the target crime, but this fails because the facts appear more as if the two are acting as if they have an agreement, rather than Alma simply giving Bob instructions.
Alma's Lack of Specific Intent Defense to Burglary, Larceny, and Extortion Fails.
Burglary, larceny, and extortion all require specific intent, not general intent. Alma made a plan in advance and found a partner in crime to carry it out, she intended the burglary, or in the alternative larceny, and extortion.
Alma's Lack of Intent to Permanently Deprive of Possession Defense to Larceny Probably Fails.
Alma may claim she never intended to keep the documents, but this may fail because the facts don't tell us she intended to replace them once she accomplished her goal, and she may have had no incentive to do so, leading to the presumption she didn't intend to.
Alma Cannot Reasonably Make a Necessity or Duress Defense. Alma's Defense to Felony Murder of Superseding Cause Fails.
As stated earlier, Ed pushing Bob was not a superseding cause because it was directly reacting to the burglary itself.
2. BOB'SCRIMES
Bob's Conspiracy to Commit Burglary, or In the Alternative Larceny, and Extortion, Does not Merge with the Target Crimes.
Conspiracy is the act of agreeing with one or more other people to commit a specific crime or series of crimes with the intent to make such agreement where at least one party believes there is an agreement (in most jurisdictions) and a co-conspirator has
???????
made an overt act, including minor preparation, in furtherance of the conspiracy (again in most jurisdictions).
Bob agreed with Alma to break into Ed's drawer for Alma's extortion purposes when he "said he would help her"; Bob intended to make an agreement to commit a crime, did make such agreement, and his actions when he went with Alma to Ed's office meet the overt act and show he believed there was such agreement. Causation is met because he would not have entered the agreement had he not intended for the crime to occur. Bob is guilty of conspiracy.
Bob May be Guilty of Burglary.
Burglary at common law was the breaking and entering of the dwelling of another at night with intent to commit a felony. Today it is the entering of any structure of another without license with intent to commit a crime at any time of day, whether breaking or not, in most jurisdictions. Both actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma and Bob entered Ed's office, a structure, without license, with the intent to steal confidential documents, a crime. Causation is met because the entering of Ed's office with such intent would not have occurred but for Alma taking Bob there, and the result is not too remote or accidental, meeting both actual and proximate causation (as defined by the MPC).
Bob May be Guilty of Larceny, a Lesser Included Offense of Burglary.
Larceny is the taking away by trespass of the personal property of another with intent to permanently deprive them of possession. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
If not all the elements of burglary are met, Bob may be charged with larceny, because Alma and Bob removed the documents from Ed's desk. This analysis may be necessary because Ed is Alma's employer, so entering his office may not have qualified for burglary, if she had license to do so. Causation for larceny is met because the
??
documents would not have been taken had Alma not asked Bob to help her take them and brought him to the scene where they were then taken.
Pinkerton will Hold Bob Liable for All Alma's Foreseeable Crimes in Furtherance of the Conspiracy.
Bob is guilty of all foreseeable crimes Alma commits in furtherance of the conspiracy. So even if he is unaware of the plan to commit extortion, it is foreseeable so Bob will be guilty of that as well.
Bob May be Guilty of Attempted Extortion Through Co-conspirator Liability, Because He Likely Knew Alma's Purpose for the Burglary.
Extortion is a modern crime where possession or title of personal property or money is transferred to the defendant by means of threat. Here, Alma intends to use the confidential documents to threaten Ed with embarrassment, resulting in him paying her money. It is irrelevant that she believes he owes her overtime pay because she is still guilty of the attempt to extort payment by threat of embarrassment. Causation is met because she would not have taken the substantial step toward threatening Ed with embarrassment to get him to give her money if she hadn't entered his office with the intent to steal the documents for this purpose.
If Alma's extortion plan was known to Bob or even if it was merely foreseeable, Bob will be guilty as well.
Bob is Guilty of Felony Murder through Co-conspirator Liability if He is Guilty of Burglary, Because Diane's Death is Foreseeable.
Homicide is the act or omission resulting in the death of another human. Involuntary manslaughter is to do so recklessly or grossly negligently; voluntary manslaughter is to do so with intent to kill but adequately provoked by the victim; second-degree murder is to do so with malice aforethought either through reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life or intent to kill (either express or implied), and first-degree murder is to do so
??????
with premeditation and deliberation or during the commission of a felony before the defendant has reached safe haven. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Alma entered Ed's office without license with the intent to commit larceny and/or extortion. This should be sufficient to convict her of burglary. If so, Dianne's death occurred during the course of the burglary when Bob fell on her; she would not have died but for the burglary, and because Ed pushing Bob was a reacting intervening force directly from the burglary itself, her death was not so unforeseeable as to break causation -- it is not too remote or accidental.
Even if Bob is not guilty of conspiracy, which he is, he participated in the burglary during the course of which Diane's foreseeable death occurred, and Bob is guilty of Felony Murder.
BOB'S DEFENSES
Bob's Lack of Specific Intent Defense to Burglary, Larceny, and Extortion Fails.
Burglary, larceny, and extortion all require specific intent, not general intent. Alma made a plan in advance and found a partner in crime to carry it out; she intended the burglary, or in the alternative larceny, and extortion.
Bob's Defense Against the Agreement of Conspiracy Likely Fails.
Conspiracy agreement can be implied through actions not just expressed through words, and the facts show Bob and Alma acting together as they burglarize Ed's office, so he will be found to have entered an agreement.
Bob's Defense to Felony Murder of Superseding Cause Fails.
As stated earlier, Ed pushing Bob was not a superseding cause because it was directly reacting to the burglary itself.
3. ED'SCRIMES
???
Ed Committed Assault when he "Chased Bob Onto a Balcony."
Assault is the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of imminent bodily harm. A reasonable person in Bob's place would have been in such apprehension, and Ed did so intentionally; Bob's apprehension would not have occurred but for Ed's act, and the result was not too remote or accidental to hold Ed liable, so both actual and proximate causation are met.
Ed Committed Battery when He Pushed Bob, Which Merges with Homicide.
Battery is the intentional touching of a person without consent, causing injury or offense to a reasonable person.
Ed pushed Bob intentionally, touching him in a way offensive to a reasonable person without consent, so he is guilty of battery. But the push led to Bob falling
off the balcony, then falling on Diane, so if Ed is guilty of Diane's homicide, the battery is transferred from Bob to Diane and merges with the homicide.
Ed Committed Homicide When He Pushed Bob Over the Railing -- Either Involuntary Manslaughter, Second-Degree Murder, or First-Degree Murder.
Homicide is the act or omission resulting in the death of another human. Involuntary manslaughter is to do so recklessly or grossly negligently; voluntary manslaughter is to do so with intent to kill but adequately provoked by the victim, second-degree murder is to do so with malice aforethought either through reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life or intent to kill (either express or implied), and first-degree murder is to do so with premeditation and deliberation or during the commission of a felony before the defendant has reached safe haven. Actual and proximate causation must be met.
Here, Ed acted with reckless disregard for extreme risk to human life when he pushed Bob over the railing if that was a substantially certain result of his act, and would therefore be guilty of depraved heart murder, even if he did not intend to kill.
???
Ed's Intent Toward Bob Transfers to Diane.
Ed intended to push Bob, not Diane, but if he did so with such mens rea as necessary for murder, he is guilty of murdering Diane through transferred intent.
ED'S DEFENSES
Ed's Defense of Property Defense Fails.
Ed's Provocation Defense Fails.
Murder can be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter for adequate provocation where not mere words are used, but that fails here because Bob was merely in his office.
Ed's Lack of Intent to Kill Defense May Fail, If He Acted with Reckless Disregard for Extreme Risk to Human Life.
Ed's Lack of Premeditation and Deliberation Defense May Fail.
??????
QUESTION 2 - SELECTED ANSWER B
1. Statev.Alma
SOLICITATION
Solicitation is the act of asking or encouraging another person to commit a criminal act with the intent that the person commits the act. The crime is completed as soon as the asking has occurred.
Here, when Alma asked Bob to "open a locked drawer in Ed's desk so that she could obtain confidential documents for use in embarrassing Ed," that is sufficient to hold Alma criminally liable for the act of solicitation.
Alma will not be able to raise any defenses for this crime. Alma will be guilty of solicitation.
CONSPIRACY
Conspiracy is an agreement between two or more parties to commit a crime with the intent to agree and the intent to complete the objectives of the crime. The defendants are liable for the committed crimes as well as all foreseeable crimes committed by other co-defendants. Some jurisdictions require an overt act. It does not merge with the resulting crime.
Here, after Alma asked Bob to help her break into Ed's office, Bob said "he would help her." That is sufficient to constitute an agreement.
Next, both Alma and Bob went to Ed's office, where Ed "opened the locked desk drawer." This is sufficient to demonstrate an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Alma will be guilty of conspiracy.
?
CONSPIRACY - PINKERTON LIABILITY
Pinkerton liability exists to hold each co-conspirator liable for crimes committed by other co-conspirators, as long as they are foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy.
Here, because Bob committed additional crimes (discussed infra), the prosecution will argue that Alma should be liable. Those crimes are foreseeable and in furtherance of the conspiracy; therefore, Alma will be convicted of those crimes as well.
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
Accomplice liability includes four different categories: principal in the first degree, principal in the second degree, accessory before the fact, and accessory after the fact. A principal in the first degree is one who is present at the scene and commits at least one element of the crime. A principal in the second degree is one who is present at the scene, but does not commit any elements of the crime. An accomplice is liable for all foreseeable crimes.
Here, Alma will be considered a principal in the first degree since she actually "removed the confidential documents from the drawer." Similar to the liability discussed under Pinkerton (discussed supra), she will be held liable for all foreseeable crimes committed by Bob.
LARCENY
Larceny is the asportation or taking away of another person's property by trespass or trick with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here, the prosecution will argue that after Alma broke into Ed's office with Bob and "removed the confidential documents from the drawer," that constitutes larceny.
Alma, on the other hand, will argue that there was no taking away or asportation, since they were both caught in the act by Ed. The facts do not state whether Alma escaped with the documents, so additional facts will be needed to establish this detail.

The prosecution will then argue that even in the absence of Alma physically departing with the documents, asportation does not require an extensive distance from the location where the property was removed from. Even running to the exterior of Ed's office into the hallway will suffice. Also, Alma possesses the mens rea of permanently depriving Ed of the documents, since she was hoping to use them "in embarrassing Ed into paying her what she thought he owed her." The prosecution will prevail under these arguments.
Alma will be guilty of larceny.
BURGLARY
Under common law, burglary is the breaking and entering into the dwelling of another at night with the intent to commit a felony within.
Here, the prosecution will point to the facts that Alma broke into Ed's office to steal.
Alma will argue that the elements of dwelling and night are not met, since the facts do not state when the crime occurred and Ed's office is not a dwelling.
Modernly, burglary is the breaking and entering into the a building with the intent to commit a felony within.
Based on this definition, although the facts do not specifically state that Alma and Bob broke into Ed's office (it is implied that they entered the office since they were able to open the locked desk drawer from within), breaking and entering will be sufficient even if the defendant pushes the door open; therefore, it can be reasonably inferred that a breaking and entering occurred. Moreover, Alma had the intent to commit a larceny (discussed supra). The prosecution will be successful in establishing burglary.
Alma will be guilty of burglary. MERGER

The merger doctrine provides that lesser included crimes will be merged into more serious crimes if the more serious crimes include the elements of the lesser included crimes.
Here, because burglary includes the elements of larceny, Alma cannot be convicted of both. She will be convicted of the more serious crime of burglary.
ATTEMPT
An attempt is the dangerous proximity of completing the object crime.
Here, the prosecution will charge Alma with attempted extortion, since she was trying to obtain "confidential documents for use in embarrassing Ed into paying her." Since she was caught by Ed while she was in Ed's office, she likely was unable to extort Ed. However, because she possessed the documents, it should suffice for the element of being in dangerous proximity of completing the crime.
Alma will be guilty of attempted extortion.
DEFENSES
a) Necessity
Necessity is the choice between two evils. It applies when faced with a natural force.
Here, Alma may argue that her livelihood depended on receiving the money that Ed owes her (if that is to be the case, which is not specified in the facts). However, a private monetary dispute is not a natural force (such as a hurricane, earthquake, etc.).
Moreover, the prosecution will argue that the law provides civil remedy for employment disputes, including overtime pay. Alma could have sued Ed in civil courts under the Fair Labor Standards Act or other applicable statutes.

Alma will fail to raise this defense.
2. Statev.Bob
CONSPIRACY Defined supra.
Here, because Bob told Alma that "he would help her," they both went to Ed's office, and Bob actually opened the locked desk drawer; all of these will suffice to establish that there was an agreement between Bob and Alma, that they both intended to agree and to complete the object crime, and there was an overt act.
Bob will be guilty of conspiracy.
CONSPIRACY -- PINKERTON LIABILITY Defined supra.
Bob will be guilty of all foreseeable crimes committed by Alma in furtherance of the conspiracy (discussed supra).
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
Defined supra.
Here, Bob will be considered a principal in the first degree, since the facts state that he "opened the locked desk drawer" and "removed the confidential documents in the drawer." He will be held liable for all foreseeable crimes committed by Alma.
LARCENY
Defined and discussed supra.
Bob will be guilty of larceny. BURGLARY
?
Defined and discussed supra. Bob will be guilty of burglary.
MERGER
The merger doctrine provides that lesser included crimes will be merged into more serious crimes if the more serious crimes include the elements of the lesser included crimes.
Here, because burglary includes the elements of larceny, Alma cannot be convicted of both. She will be convicted of the more serious crime of burglary.
BATTERY
Battery is the harmful and offensive touching of another without consent.
Here, the facts state that Bob "landed on Diane," which is a harmful and offensive touching. Furthermore, Diane "died instantly," which demonstrates harm.
Bob will argue that he was actually pushed by Ed, which caused him to fall "over the balcony railing" and eventually land on Diane. Therefore, he lacks the requisite intent to touch Diane. Bob will be successful under these arguments.
Bob will not be guilty of battery.
HOMICIDE / MURDER
Murder is the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought. Malice can be express or implied, which is demonstrated through the intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily injury, reckless disregard for human life (depraved heart), or intent to commit a felony.
Here, a death occurred because Diane died. a) First-Degree Murder

First-degree murder is killing with premeditation and deliberation. It can be shown through a cool and dispassionate killing or pre-design to kill. First-degree murder can also be during the commission of a felony (discussed infra).
b) FelonyMurderRule
The felony murder rule provides that killing that occurred during the commission of a felony will suffice for conviction of first-degree murder. Courts have placed restrictions to require that the felony must be inherently dangerous and separate from the act that caused the death. Causation is also a factor.
The prosecution will argue that because Diane died in the commission of the felony (of burglary), Bob should be convicted for the murder of Diane under first-degree murder. Burglary is a dangerous felony, which will suffice for the purpose of convicting Bob.
Ed, on the other hand, will argue that Diane's death lacks causation. Causation includes but-for and proximate cause.
But-for cause is the actual cause. Here, but-for Bob's running away, he would not have landed onto Diane. The but-for cause is present.
Proximate cause is the legal cause. Legal cause pertains to the foreseeability of the defendant's act. Bob will argue that there is an intervening cause when he was pushed by Ed. Ed's pushing was the superseding cause which breaks the causal connection. Bob will likely prevail under this argument in establishing that proximate cause is not present.
Bob will not be guilty of first-degree murder.
c) Second-DegreeMurder
All other types of murder are second-degree murder.

Assuming that Bob will not be found guilty of first-degree murder, the prosecution will charge Bob with second-degree murder.
d) VoluntaryManslaughter
Voluntary manslaughter is killing committed under the heat of passion. Passion is provoked by an adequate provocation that is sudden and intense, the defendant does not have an opportunity to cool off, and indeed did not cool off.
There is no evidence to suggest that there was any provocation between Bob and Diane.
Bob's murder will not be reduced to voluntary manslaughter. e) InvoluntaryManslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter is killing committed due to reckless disregard of a justifiable risk to human life.
Here, Bob will argue that his charges should be reduced to involuntary manslaughter because he lacks the requisite intent to kill Diane. Rather, it was due to him running away from his crime.
The prosecution will then argue that albeit he was pushed by Ed, it is foreseeable that body touching will occur in runaway situations, and Bob should nonetheless be liable for the murder of Diane.
Bob will be guilty of involuntary manslaughter.
DEFENSES Withdrawal
A co-conspirator can withdraw by announcing his withdrawal to other co-conspirators prior to the commitment of the crime in time for them to abandon their plans. The

defendant will be relieved of future liability for crimes committed beyond that point, but will still be guilty of crimes already committed as well as the crime of conspiracy.
Bob will argue that when he ran away after being caught by Ed, he withdrew from the conspiracy.
However, there is no evidence to suggest that Bob actually announced his withdrawal by notifying Diane.
Therefore, this defense will not apply. 3. Statev.Ed
BATTERY Defined supra.
The prosecution will be able to establish that there is a harmful or offensive touching to Bob. Although Bob was "unharmed," the pushing by Ed is nonetheless offensive.
Ed will raise the following defenses:
a) Self-Defense
Self-defense is a defense as long as reasonable force is used to protect against an imminent attack.
Here, there is no evidence to suggest that Ed was under any imminent attack by Bob or Alma.
This defense will fail. b) Defense of Property
?
A defendant may use reasonable force to defend against property. Deadly force is not reasonable.
Here, Ed will argue that he was defending the confidential documents that were being removed from his office.
However, the prosecution will argue that because Ed was chasing Bob, which led to the pushing, that exceeds the scope of defense of property.
This defense will fail. c) Citizen'sArrest
A citizen can use reasonable force to arrest another if he witnesses the commission of a crime.
Here, Ed will argue that because he saw Bob removing documents from his office, it was a crime and he was arresting Bob.
However, there is nothing from the facts that indicate that Ed was indeed attempting to arrest Bob when he chased him, such as by yelling "I'm arresting you" or something to that effect.
This defense will fail.
MURDER
Defined supra. Ed will be charged for the killing of Diane.
a) First-Degree Murder Defined supra.
There is no evidence to suggest that Ed premeditated or deliberated.

Ed will not be guilty of first-degree murder. b) Second-Degree Murder
Defined supra.
Ed will be charged with second-degree murder. c) VoluntaryManslaughter
Defined supra.
There is no evidence to suggest provocation.
Ed's charges will not be reduced to voluntary manslaughter. d) InvoluntaryManslaughter
Defined supra.
Here, Ed will argue that his charges should be reduced to involuntary manslaughter because he risked human life when he was reckless in pushing Bob off a balcony. It is foreseeable that pushing large objects (such as a human -- Bob) will result in people getting injured or killed.
Ed will prevail under these arguments.
Ed will be guilty of involuntary manslaughter of Diane.
Defenses
None for the murder.

QUESTION 3
County planned to make improvements on one of its roads. To that end, on May 1, County entered into a contract with Installco containing the following terms: County agreed to repave the road by June 1; Installco agreed to install new guardrails, which was expected to take three weeks, after County had completed repaving; and County agreed to pay Installco $200,000.
On June 15, Installco learned that County was far from completing the repaving of the road. It sent County an email stating: "The June 1 start date for the installation has passed. You knew when we signed the contract that we have another large guardrail installation job starting on August 1 and do not have enough equipment to do both jobs simultaneously. Please advise immediately as to your schedule for completion of the repaving."
On June 18, County responded with an email stating: "We are doing our best."
On July 1, County had not yet completed the repaving of the road. Installco received an offer to do a two-week guardrail installation job beginning immediately. Installco sent County an email stating that it no longer intended to perform the contract because of County's failure to complete repaving.
On August 10, County finally completed repaving the road. It located another company to install the guardrails, but had to pay $300,000.
1. What arguments can County reasonably make that Installco breached the contract? Discuss.
2. What arguments can Installco reasonably make that it did not breach the contract? Discuss.
3. Who is likely to prevail? Discuss.

QUESTION 3 - SELECTED ANSWER A
1. What arguments can County reasonably make that Installco breached the contract?
U.C.C. V. COMMON LAW:
The Uniform Commercial Code, or UCC, will govern all contracts for the sale of goods which are identifiable and movable at the time of sale. Contracts for services will be governed by the common law.
This is a contract for the installation of guardrails. The providing of the guardrails is just incidental to the service of installing them. Therefore, this contract will be governed by the common law.
This agreement will be governed by the common law. FORMATION:
Formation is created by mutual assent. Mutual assent is often shown by an offer and acceptance, supported by sufficient consideration.
On May 1st, County and Installco showed present contractual intent by entering a contract with the following terms.
Quantity: Guardrails for the new road.
Time for Performance: To be completed within three weeks of the County finishing paving the road on June 1st.
Identity of Parties: County and Installco Price: $200,000

Subject matter: Installing guardrails.
There is valid consideration because County is giving $200,000 to Installco in exchange for the legal benefit of Installco installing the guardrails.
Therefore, there were clear and definite terms on the part of the contracting party. And as both parties showed a present contractual intent by entering into this agreement, there has been a valid contract formed.
DEFENSES TO FORMATION:
Parol Evidence Rule:
Statements, whether written or oral, made prior to or contemporaneously with the formation of a contract will not be allowed by the courts to enter the contract if the contract is fully integrated.
County will argue that Installco's statement of June 15, showing that County knew that Installco had previous business agreements and that time was of the essence if County wanted Installco to perform, that the court should not allow this statement to enter into the contract because it was made after the formation of the contract.
However, Installco will argue that it falls under one of the exceptions to the Parol Evidence Rule. Installco will argue that because the written email shows a condition precedent to the formation of the contract, the court should allow it in.
Therefore, since this statement falls under one of the exceptions to the rule, it will not be barred from entering into the contract.

BREACH:
Anticipatory Repudiation:
County can argue that Installco breached the contract by stating on July 1st that it would not perform the contract. Installco will defend that County did not fulfill a condition to the contract, and thus Installco was not in breach.
Actual Breach:
County will argue that Installco breached the contract when they did not perform after County finished paving the road on August 10. However, Installco will counter that they were not in breach, because their duty to perform under the contract never arose due to the non-occurrence of a condition precedent to the existence of a contract.
Prospective Inability to Perform:
County will argue that by accepting the contract for another project that was two weeks long and started immediately showed a prospective inability to perform on Installco's part. However, if that project went as planned, it was finished before County finished paving the road. Therefore, it would not have hindered Installco's ability to perform. Thus, County will not succeed in this instance.
2. What arguments can Installco reasonably make that it did not breach the contract? CONDITIONS:
A condition is an act or event not certain to occur which if excused or satisfied gives rise to or extinguishes a duty to perform under the terms of a contract.
Installco will argue that the County's agreement to finish paving the road by June 1st was a condition precedent to Installco's duty to install the guardrails. This is likely a

condition, because it is an event not certain to occur, and if County does not finish the road on June 1st, Installco's duty to perform does not arise under the terms of the contract.
Excuse/Satisfaction of Condition:
County will argue that when Installco sent the email on June 15th inquiring how long it would take for County to complete the project they were waiving the condition to finish by June 1st.
However, Installco will show that it clearly stated in the communication that it had another job to perform that County knew of when it entered into the contract with Installco.
Therefore, when County sent the email in reply that "We are doing our best," the condition to complete the paving on June 1st was not waived by Installco.
Non-occurrence of a condition precedent:
Installco will therefore be able to argue that because the condition precedent was never fulfilled, satisfied, or excused, its duty to perform under the terms of the contract never arose, and that it is thus not in breach.
Time is of the Essence Clause:
Installco will argue that there was a time is of the essence clause in the contract, and that if County didn't finish paving on June 1st, their duty to perform would not arise. Installco will show that they had a previously existing contract which County knew about, and that was a reason the County job was to start on June 1st, so it could finish the job for the County before moving on to its other project.

3. Whoislikelytoprevail?
County will probably lose in this action. First, time is of the essence is in this contract to enable Installco to perform. Second, Installco's duty to perform under the contract did not arise unless County finished paving the road on June 1st. County did not finish paving until August 10, almost a month and a half after their speculated date of completion.
Therefore, County will not be able to recover from Installco the $100,000 extra it had to pay to get another contractor to install the guardrails.

QUESTION 3 - SELECTED ANSWER B
COUNTY (C) v. INSTALLCO (I) GOVERNING LAW
The UCC will govern contracts for the sale of goods while the common law will govern all other contracts.
Here, the contract is for the installation of guardrails. Although it could be argued that because guardrails are a good, the UCC should govern this contract. However, what C is really bargaining for here is the installation of the guardrails. In fact, as their name indicates, their specialty is a service of installation and not just merely a provider of goods.
Additionally, because the contract involves the installation of equipment which must be installed on a busy highway in such a specialized manner, it is likely that the court would find that it was the installation that was the predominant factor of the contract.
This contract will be governed by the common law. FORMATION AND DEFENSES
a) Offer
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent, clear and definite in its terms and communicated in such a way so as to create in a specific offeree the reasonable expectation that the offeror is willing to enter into an agreement.
Here, C wanted I to install guardrails and offered to pay I $200,000 to do so. Thus, the terms of the offer were sufficiently definite as follows:

Quantity: Enough guardrail to complete the roadway repaved by C.
Time for Performance: By three weeks after C repaved the road, but no later than the first week of August.
Identity of the Parties: I and C.
Price: $200,000
Subject Matter: Installation of Guardrail.
Further, a reasonable person in I's position would interpret this as an offer.
There has been an offer.
b) Acceptance
An outward manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer.
Because I and C "entered into a contract" it would appear that I accepted the terms of the above offer.
There has been acceptance.
c) Consideration
The bargained-for exchange involving a legal detriment and benefit to both parties where each party views his performance as the "price" to be paid for return performance.

Here, I will suffer the detriment of having to perform the installation and provide the guardrail, while incurring the benefit of receiving payment from C, while C will suffer the detriment of having to pay I while incurring the benefit of their roads being repaired.
There is sufficient consideration. d) Defenses to Formation
None.
CONDITIONS AND COVENANTS
A condition is an act or event, not certain to occur, which if excused or satisfied, gives rise to or extinguishes a legal duty to tender performance under the terms of a contract. A covenant is simply a promise to perform.
a) Express Conditions
The contract specified that before I's duty to perform the installation arose, C would repave the road. C agreed to do this by June 1st.
Thus, C had a duty to repave the road by June 1st. I will argue that because C did not do so their duty to install the guardrails never arose.
C will argue that this was merely a promise and not a condition.
When there is a doubt as to whether a clause is a covenant or a condition, the courts will look to the intent of the parties as demonstrated through the words used.
Here, the words used are that C "agreed" to repave the road and that I "agreed" to install the guardrails.

I is going to argue that this was a condition. C is going to argue that this was a promise.
Before entering into the contract, the facts indicate that I and C had a conversation that I would have another job starting on August 1st and that, because they would need three weeks from when the repaving was done to finish the installation, that C's repaving would need to be done no later than the first week of June; otherwise the contract would not be valid.
Such conversations are considered parol evidence. I will seek to enter parol evidence to show that this was a condition and not a promise.
b) Parol Evidence
Statements whether written or oral which are made prior to or contemporaneously with the formation of a contact cannot alter or vary the terms of an integrated contract.
C will argue that because this conversation took place prior to the actual agreement, it cannot be introduced into evidence.
c) ExceptionstoParolEvidence
I will argue that, because the conversation dealt with a condition precedent to legal effectiveness of the contract itself, it should be admitted.
d) Any Relevant Evidence Test
Even if this argument fails, I will argue that because any relevant evidence should be allowed to show the intent of the parties in regards to whether a contract is intended to be an integrated contract, and because such a conversation would be relevant, he should be able to testify about the conversation.

The parol evidence will likely be allowed into evidence to show that there was a condition precedent to legal effectiveness of the agreement.
Therefore, because the parol evidence will be allowed this clause will likely be viewed as an express condition and thus I's duty to perform never arose.
e) Implied-in-Fact Conditions
The parties have an implied condition that they will act in good faith.
I may argue that C's failure to repave the road shows that they were not acting in good faith.
However, C's e-mail of June 18th indicates that they were "doing their best". This condition has been satisfied.
f) Implied-in-Law, aka Constructive Conditions
The court will imply that longer performance comes before shorter performance. Therefore, I's duty to install the railing will be a condition precedent to C's duty to pay.
g) Prospective Inability
On June 15th, when I realized that the road had not been paved yet, and that their deadline to begin the work without losing the other job had passed, they asked C for assurances that the road would be paved. Their request for assurances was met with a response that C was "doing their best". This statement by C was NOT adequate assurance.
Because of this, I is entitled to suspend performance and sue for breach.

DISCHARGE OF DUTIES
As stated supra, C's duty to repave was not performed and therefore I's duty to install did not arise.
Additionally, even if the court rejects the Parol Evidence argument, it is likely that because C did not perform this will be viewed as a breach.
C would argue that this would be a minor breach; however, in light of the time factors and that I had another job which it had to complete, this argument will likely fail.
I had not breached their duty because their duty did not arise. a) Repudiation vs. Mitigation of Damages
However, C will argue that I's acceptance of the other job was a repudiation of the contract.
I will counter that because they had requested but not received assurances, and because they had put C on notice prior to the contract formation that they had another job which they would have to start no later than July 7th (three weeks prior to August 1st), they were entitled to repudiate the contract in order to mitigate their damages, and rightfully did so on July 1st.
C will argue that I was obligated to give them until July 7th to finish the repaving. However, this argument will fail, because they did not respond to I's request for assurances.
b) Prevention
Additionally, I will argue that by failing to pave the road, C prevented them from performing under the contract.

c) ImpossibilityofPerformance
I will also argue that because C failed to pave the road, it was objectively impossible for them to perform their duty under the contract.
Additionally, C had breached their duty because they did not pave the road.
BREACH
As discussed supra, C will argue that I breached but, in fact C breached. C's breach goes to the heart of the contract because it prevented I from performing. Therefore, it will be considered a major breach.
REMEDIES
a) General Damages / Expectation Damages
I will argue that it is entitled to the benefit of its bargain from the contract. This would include the profit that it expected to receive from the project.
C will argue that because it never received any benefit of the contract, it should not be entitled to pay these damages.
Further, C may continue to argue breach by I, in which case it would ask the court to allow it to recover the difference between the contract price of $200,000 and the amount they had to pay another contractor to install the railing ($300,000) for a total of $100,000, plus incidental and reliance damages.
b) SpecialDamages/ConsequentialDamages(Hadleyv.Baxendale)
Because I properly mitigated its damages, by requesting assurance and then repudiating the contract, it did not suffer any consequential damages.

Conclusion
For the reasons stated above, I is likely to prevail.

QUESTION 4
Rick and Walt are next-door neighbors. Rick hosted nightly rehearsals in his backyard for his band, which featured several electric guitars and amplifiers that he owned. Because the rehearsals were so loud, Walt could not conduct telephone conversations in his house even with the windows closed. He repeatedly asked Rick to lower the volume of his rehearsals, but Rick refused.
One night, while Walt was standing in his own yard, he attempted to disrupt a rehearsal by trying to spray Rick with water from his garden hose. He missed Rick with the water, but hit Cal, another band member, and the amplifiers. The water caused Cal to suffer a severe electric shock when it contacted an electric guitar he was holding. The water also destroyed the amplifiers.
Rick picked up another electric guitar, ran into Walt's yard, and charged at Walt, swinging at his head. Walt ducked and ran into his house.
1. What tort claims, not based on negligence, can Walt reasonably bring against Rick? Discuss.
2. What tort claims, not based on negligence, can Rick reasonably bring against Walt? Discuss.
3. What tort claims, not based on negligence, can Cal reasonably bring against Walt? Discuss.

Walt v Rick
QUESTION 4 - SELECTED ANSWER A
?A. Nuisance
Nuisance is unreasonable interference with plaintiff's use and enjoyment of land. In order to determine whether the interference is unreasonable and substantial, the court will look at the following factors:
1) Harm v Utility
The seriousness and probability of harm in comparison to the utility of the activity.
Rick will argue that his music is his life and the utility is very high. Walt will argue that the rehearsals and playing are so loud that he cannot conduct a telephone conversation. Walt will argue that the interference is substantial because it constitutes a breach of the peace. Also, Walt will argue that this occurs nightly, so there is no avoiding the interference.
It is likely that a court will favor the plaintiff in this argument because the harm outweighs the utility due to the breach of the peace caused by and the frequency (nightly) of the interference.
2) Hypersensitivity of the Plaintiff
The sensitivities and particular activities on either side will be considered to determine if that is what is resulting in the claim of interference.
It does not appear that Walt is particularly sensitive to Rick's activities. As discussed above, the interference is a breach of the peace and it occurs every night.
The court will favor the plaintiff in this argument.

3) Natural or Incidental to the Activity
The court will examine whether or not the interference is naturally occurring as a result of the activity, or whether it is clearly artificial and incidental to the activity.
Walt will argue that the use of high output guitars and amplifiers are creating interference that is clearly incidental to the activity.
The court will favor the plaintiff in this argument.
4) Did the Plaintiff Come to the Nuisance
If the plaintiff came to the nuisance and is suing, the court will consider whether the plaintiff still has a nuisance claim, but may have to indemnify the defendant.
It does not appear that the plaintiff came to the nuisance in this case.
B. Battery
Under Tort Law, battery is a volitional and intentional act by defendant which results in a harmful or offensive touching to the person of the plaintiff. The intent associated with tortious battery is that the defendant desired the result, the harmful or offensive touching, or that he was substantially certain that his act would result in it.
Rick committed a volitional act because of his affirmative act of picking up the guitar, running into Walt's yard and charging at Walt. Rick committed an intentional act because he charged at Walt and swung at his head with the intent to cause a harmful or offensive touching. All reasonable persons would agree that hitting someone in the head with a guitar would result in a harmful or offensive touching. However, Rick will argue that he did not hit Walt because he ducked and ran into the house.
Therefore, Walt cannot bring a claim of battery against Rick.

C. Assault
Under Tort Law, assault is a volitional and intentional act by defendant which results in plaintiff's reasonable apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching to their person. The intent associated with tortious assault is that the defendant desired the result, plaintiff's apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching, or that he was substantially certain that his act would result in it.
Rick committed a volitional act because of his affirmative act of picking up the guitar, running into Walt's yard and charging at Walt. Rick committed an intentional act because he charged at Walt and swung at his head with the intent to cause a harmful or offensive touching. All reasonable persons would agree that hitting someone in the head with a guitar would result in a harmful or offensive touching. All reasonable persons would agree that almost being hit by someone in the head with a guitar would result in reasonable apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching. Walt will argue that Rick missed him because he ducked, but that the incident did actually result in his apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching.
Therefore, Walt can bring a claim of assault against Rick.
Rick v Walt
A. Battery
Under Tort Law, battery is a volitional and intentional act by defendant which results in a harmful or offensive touching to the person of the plaintiff. The intent associated with tortious battery is that the defendant desired the result, the harmful or offensive touching, or that he was substantially certain that his act would result in it.
Walt committed a volitional act because of his affirmative act of spraying water from his garden hose into Rick's yard. Walt committed an intentional act because he desired to disrupt the rehearsal by spraying with water. All reasonable persons would agree that
?
being sprayed by water is an offensive touching. However, Walt will argue that he didn't commit a battery because the water never actually hit Rick.
Therefore, Rick cannot bring a claim of battery against Walt.
B. Assault
Under Tort Law, assault is a volitional and intentional act by defendant which results in plaintiff's reasonable apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching to their person. The intent associated with tortious assault is that the defendant desired the result, plaintiff's apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching, or that he was substantially certain that his act would result in it.
Walt committed a volitional act because of his affirmative act of spraying water from his garden hose into Rick's yard. Walt committed an intentional act because he desired to disrupt the rehearsal by spraying with water. All reasonable persons would agree that being sprayed by water is an offensive touching. All reasonable persons would agree that almost being hit by sprayed water would result in reasonable apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching. Rick will argue that Walt missed him, but that the incident did actually result in his apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching.
Therefore, Rick can bring a claim of assault against Walt.
C. Trespass
Under Tort Law, a trespass is a physical invasion of the plaintiff's real property (land).
Walt committed trespass when he sprayed water over Rick's property line because that is a physical invasion of Rick's property, and because Walt sprayed the water with the intent to hit Rick's property.
Therefore, Rick can bring a claim of trespass against Walt.

D. Trespass to Chattels
Under Tort Law, trespass to chattels is intentional interference with plaintiff's ownership or possessory interest in a chattel.
Walt intentionally interfered with Rick's amplifiers because he sprayed water with the intent of hitting Rick's property. The water actually caused damage to the amplifiers because per the facts, the amplifiers were destroyed.
Therefore, Rick can bring a claim of trespass to chattels against Walt.
E. Conversion
Under Tort Law, conversion is intentional interference with plaintiff's ownership or possessory interest in a chattel that is so severe that the defendant must pay the plaintiff the full value of the chattel.
Walt intentionally interfered with Rick's amplifiers because he sprayed water with the intent of hitting Rick's property. The water actually caused damage to the amplifiers because per the facts, the amplifiers were destroyed. Walt will have to pay the full value of the amplifiers because they were destroyed.
Therefore, Rick can bring a claim of conversion against Walt.
Cal v Walt
A. Battery Due to Transferred Intent
Under Tort Law, battery is a volitional and intentional act by defendant which results in a harmful or offensive touching to the person of the plaintiff. The intent associated with tortious battery is that the defendant desired the result, the harmful or offensive touching, or that he was substantially certain that his act would result in it. Transferred intent can occur as a result of the defendant's intent to target one party, but instead the
?
harm falls on a different victim. It can also occur where the defendant commits one intentional tort, and the intent associated with that tort transfers to another intentional tort. The intentional torts that apply to transferred intent are Battery, Assault, Trespass to Chattels, Trespass to Land and False Imprisonment.
Walt committed a volitional act because of his affirmative act of spraying water from his garden hose into Rick's yard. Walt committed an intentional act because he desired to disrupt the rehearsal by spraying with water. All reasonable persons would agree that being sprayed by water is an offensive touching. Cal will argue that although Walt intended to hit Rick, he still committed a battery under the theory of transferred intent, because he hit him instead. As well, Cal will argue that his was both a harmful and offensive touching because he was hit by water and shocked by his electric guitar when it got wet.
Therefore, Cal can bring a claim of battery against Walt.
B. Assault Due to Transferred Intent
Under Tort Law, assault is a volitional and intentional act by defendant which results in plaintiff's reasonable apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching to their person. The intent associated with tortious assault is that the defendant desired the result, plaintiff's apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching, or that he was substantially certain that his act would result in it. Transferred intent can occur as a result of the defendant's intent to target one party, but instead the harm falls on a different victim. It can also occur where the defendant commits one intentional tort, and the intent associated with that tort transfers to another intentional tort. The intentional torts that apply to transferred intent are Battery, Assault, Trespass to Chattels, Trespass to Land and False Imprisonment.
Walt committed a volitional act because of his affirmative act of spraying water from his garden hose into Rick's yard. Walt committed an intentional act because he desired to disrupt the rehearsal by spraying with water. All reasonable persons would agree that

being sprayed by water is an offensive touching. All reasonable persons would agree that almost being hit by sprayed water would result in reasonable apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching. Cal will argue that although Walt intended to hit Rick, he still committed a battery under the theory of transferred intent, because he hit him instead. As well, Cal will argue that Walt's battery actually resulted in his apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching.
Therefore, Cal can bring a claim of assault against Walt.
C. Trespass to Chattels
Under Tort Law, trespass to chattels is intentional interference with plaintiff's ownership or possessory interest in a chattel.
Walt intentionally interfered with Cal's guitar because he sprayed water with the intent of hitting Rick's property and disrupting the rehearsal. The water actually caused damage to the guitar because per the facts, the guitar and Cal suffered an electric shock, assuming that an electric shock would harm an electric guitar.
Therefore, Cal can bring a claim of trespass to chattels against Walt if he can show damages to his guitar in this case.

I. WALT v. RICK
QUESTION 4 - SELECTED ANSWER B
?A. NUISANCE
Nuisance is an intentional act that causes an unreasonable and substantial interference with the use and enjoyment of another's land.
1) Intent.
Intent can be established when the defendant acted with the desire that the result occurs or when the defendant acted knowing with substantial certainty that the results will occur.
Here, the facts indicate that Rick hosted every night loud rehearsals with his rock band in the backyard. Since Walt had repeatedly asked Rick to lower the volume of the rehearsals, Rick refused to do so and continued at the usual loudness. Therefore, it can be concluded that Rick acted with the requisite intent to hold loud rehearsals.
2) UnreasonableandSubstantialInterference.
Interference is unreasonable, when it would bother a reasonable person, and substantial, when it occurs over a long period of time or very intensely.
Here, the facts indicate that Walt was not able to have a telephone conversation in his house even with the windows closed, which would likely be objectionable to a reasonable person. Also, the fact that those rehearsals took place every night means that they were a substantial interference of Walt's use and enjoyment of his house.
Thus, Walt will likely be able to establish a successful claim of nuisance.

B. TRESPASS TO LAND
Trespass is an intentional act that causes an unauthorized entry onto another's land.
Intent, see definition above.
Here the facts indicate that Rick ran into Walt's yard, after Walt had sprayed water over into Rick's yard. Rick clearly desired to run into Walt's yard and he did so without getting prior permission from Walt.
Therefore, Walt will likely be able to successfully establish a claim of trespass to land.
C. ASSAULT
Assault occurs when the defendant acted with the intent to cause the plaintiff reasonable apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive touching.
1) Intent, see definition above.
The facts indicate that Rick charged with an electric guitar at Walt and swung it at Walt's head. Rick, therefore, very likely desired to hit Walt and acted with substantial certainty that he would be able to hit Walt with the guitar.
2) ReasonableApprehensionofanImmediateHarmfulTouching
The fact that Walt ducked shows that Walt saw that Rick swung the guitar at him and that he (Walt) knew that he would be hit, if he did not duck away.
Walt certainly ducked, because he feared to be hit by the guitar.
Thus, Walt will likely establish a successful case of assault against Rick.

II. RICKv.WALT
A. TRESPASS TO LAND. Definition, see above.
Intent, see definition above.
Here the facts indicate that Walt sprayed water over into Rick's yard, meaning to spray Rick with water from his garden hose. It is conceivable, since the water was sprayed from a hose and presumably a good amount of water came out, that some of the water also went onto the ground of Rick's back yard, causing a physical, unauthorized entry onto land.
Therefore, Rick will likely be able to successfully establish a claim of trespass to land.
B. CONVERSION
Conversion occurs when the defendant exerted complete control and dominion over the plaintiff's property or if the defendant in any other way substantially interfered with the use, enjoyment and property rights of the plaintiff.
Here, the facts indicate that some of the water that Walt sprayed over into Rick's yard, as discussed above, contacted one of Rick's electric guitars which was consequently destroyed. The destruction goes beyond a mere 'trespass to chattels' situation and constitutes a highly substantial interference with Rick's property.
Here it is assumed that the electric guitar belonged to Rick, since the facts state that Rick owned several guitars. If the electric guitar belonged to Cal, then Cal would be able to assert the claim of conversion.
In any case, Rick will be able to successfully assert a claim of conversion against Walt and will be able to recover the entire replacement cost for the guitar.
?
C. ASSAULT
See definition above.
1) Intent, see definition above.
The facts indicate that Walt tried to spray Rick with water from the garden hose; thus he had an intent to either touch or cause apprehension to Rick.
2) Reasonable Apprehension of an Immediate Offensive Touching
The facts don't indicate whether or not Rick saw that Walt tried to spray him with water. While being sprayed with water would not be harmful, it might constitute a potentially offensive touching.
Since Rick might not have seen what Walt attempted to do and since Rick, therefore, was likely not apprehended, Rick will likely not establish a successful case of assault.
III. CAL v. WALT
A. BATTERY THROUGH TOUCHING WITH WATER
Battery occurs when the defendant acted with the intent to cause the plaintiff a harmful or offensive touching.
1) Intent, see definition above.
Here, the facts state that Walt sprayed the water into Rick's yard to disrupt the rehearsal. Thus, Walt acted with intent.
2) TransferredIntent.
?
When a person intends to commit a tort to one person, but hits another person instead, then the intent transfers from the one person to the other person.
Here, the facts indicate that Walt tried to spray Rick with water, but he missed Rick and hit Cal instead. Thus, Walt's intent transferred from Rick to Cal.
3) Offensive Touching.
An offensive touching is a touching that is against a person's dignity.
While being sprayed with water was likely not a harmful touching, it certainly constituted an offensive touching of Cal. Therefore, Cal will likely assert a successful claim against Walt for being sprayed with water.
B. BATTERY DUE TO ELECTRIC SHOCK Battery, see definition above.
Besides being sprayed with water, Cal experienced another touching by Walt, this time a harmful touching. Here, the facts indicate that Cal suffered a severe electric shock when the water got into contact with the electric guitar that he was holding. Since Walt was the one who sprayed the water which ultimately caused the harmful touching, Walt will very likely be held liable for this kind of touching as well.
C. CONVERSION
The conversion of the electric guitar was discussed under Rick's claims against Walt. However, if the electric guitar belonged to Cal, then Cal would be able to assert the claim of conversion against Walt, as discussed under Rick's claims.



?California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2014

?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 845 S. Figueroa Street . Los Angeles, CA 90017-2515 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS JUNE 2014
CALIFORNIA FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the four essay questions from the June 2014 California First- Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers were assigned high grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were produced as submitted by the applicant, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading.
??They are
Question 1.
2. 3. 4.
reproduced here with the consent of the authors.
Number
Subject T orts
Criminal Law T orts Contracts
??
June 2014
ESSAY QUESTIONS
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all 4 questions
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines that are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?
QUESTION 1
Twenty years ago, Flowers, Inc. (Flowers) built a large greenhouse facility in a rural area twenty miles outside of the city of Urbania at a cost of $20 million. Flowers employs 20 workers. Because many of the plants grown in the greenhouse require more light than is naturally available, Flowers installed a system to provide needed light during normally dark periods. The light was extremely bright, casting a glow far beyond Flowers' property.
Flowers was successful in its business, but became concerned as the suburban area around Urbania expanded and as houses were built closer and closer to its greenhouse. Flowers decided to put up signs all around its property warning prospective residents of the light created by the business.
Harry saw Flowers' signs when he was thinking about buying one of the nearby residences, but figured that the light could not be that bad. He subsequently purchased and moved into an expensive new home, much like all the others in the area, on the street directly facing Flowers' greenhouse. After having lived there three months, Harry decided that he could not tolerate the light coming in his windows 24 hours a day. He has asked Flowers to turn off the lights, and Flowers has refused, arguing that its facility is completely up to industry standards, that there is no way to continue the business without the light, and that Harry knew about the issue when he bought the house.
1. What tort claims can Harry reasonably bring against Flowers? Discuss.
2. What remedies can Harry reasonably seek? Discuss.

QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER A Harry v. Flowers, Inc. (Flowers)
Private Nuisance
Nuisance is an unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of the land in possession of another.
Harry will assert a claim of nuisance against Flowers because the light shining into his home that lies directly across from the greenhouse that Flowers operates is an unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of his property. There is extremely bright light streaming into his home "24 hours a day" and he asserts that he can no longer tolerate it after enduring it for three months. He will claim that it is unreasonable because the neighborhood has become fairly residential and as a residential neighborhood it is not reasonable to have light shining at hours that are normally dark and that any reasonable person would be bothered by the intrusion.
Harry will argue that the extremely bright light interferes with the use and enjoyment of his property. The light streams in 24 hours a day and likely makes it difficult [to] use and enjoy his windows.
Flowers will assert that it is a successful business with no other means of operating its greenhouse. Flowers did everything in their power to maintain distance as they built their facility twenty miles outside of Urbania. The nuisance is not unreasonable, that the plaintiff came to the nuisance, and that there are measures that he can take to limit his damages such as heavy curtains or shutters. Flowers is a successful business at a cost of $20 million dollars and is a benefit to the community.
Nuisance claims are judged on the benefit and utility to society versus the detriment that the plaintiff suffers. Flowers is a large business that built an expensive greenhouse to
??
grow plants. They likely employ many people and provide a valuable service to the community at large. Harry also knew via the signs that Flowers posted around the property that the light was part of the community standard and it is likely that the price that he paid for the home, although "expensive" was reflected in that.
Flowers will also argue that Harry "came to the nuisance" and was fully aware of the consequences of moving across the street. Coming to the nuisance is not a defense and is merely used by the court in weighing the damages. They will state that he consented to the light when he moved and was fully aware and assented to the intrusion.
Harry has a valid claim of nuisance against Flowers although it is likely that he will not prevail in obtaining injunctive relief.
Public Nuisance
A nuisance that is a public detriment and usually violates an ordinance and as such affects the public at large. Proof must be offered that the Plaintiff suffered harm that was "different in kind" from the harm incurred by the general public.
Harry will assert a claim of public nuisance based on the theory that the light violates the peace and enjoyment of the entire neighborhood. Harry will argue that he has suffered harm different in kind from his neighbors because he is directly across the street from the nuisance, however he has other neighbors who are across the street and who suffer from the same issues. Harry will be unable to prove that he suffered harm that was different in kind from the other people in his neighborhood because the light shines all over.
Harry does not have a claim for public nuisance.
?
Trespass
Trespass is the intentional interference with the property of another without consent.
Harry will claim that there is unnatural light streaming onto his property at all hours and that is a trespass. Flowers intentionally lights the area up 24 hours a day in order to grow the plants and it interferes with his property by causing him to endure light during periods that are normally and naturally dark. He will state that under Martin v. Reynolds the harm need not be fully physical in order to constitute a trespass. The case regarded pollutants that were airborne and were coming onto the land, he will argue that light particles are similar to the airborne pollutants and that the fact that they are coming onto his land and illuminating it at odd hours is a trespass.
Flowers will argue that the pollutant particles were a more physical invasion and that light is not causing the same level of harm because it is merely illuminating the area and not dusting it with particles.
Harry does not have a claim for trespass.
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Extreme and outrageous conduct that is calculated to cause, and does cause extreme emotional distress.
Harry will argue that light streaming into his home at all hours causes him undue distress and is emotionally jarring. He will say that it is extreme and outrageous and that Flowers is intentionally causing him severe distress because they refuse to turn off the light. Flowers uses the light for its plants and does not calculate to cause his distress.
Harry does not have a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
???
Remedies
Injunction
An injunction is a measure that prevents the defendant from continuing the action that the plaintiff seeks relief from.
Harry will seek injunctive relief for the light shining onto his property. He will claim that the light is an unreasonable nuisance and that Flowers should be prevented from shining it at all hours.
Harry will likely not be able to obtain injunctive relief from the light because, as discussed above, Flowers business is a benefit to Urbania.
General Damages
Damages received for pain, loss, suffering or anxiety.
Harry will argue that having light streaming into his home at all hours causes him an unreasonable amount of stress and anxiety and that he should be awarded damages in light of that fact. Harry may be able to receive damages for the nuisance. He may also be able to receive damages for any measures undertaken to shut out the light.
Harry will receive damages.
Special Damages
Monetary damages awarded for loss of income.
????
Punitive Damages
Punitive damages are damages that punish a tortfeasor for malicious behavior.
There is no indication that Flowers acted in a malicious manner as they did everything in their power to warn prospective neighbors of the light issuing forth from their greenhouse.
Harry will not receive punitive damages.
?
QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER B 1) HARRY (P) V. FLOWERS (D)
Nuisance
Harry will sue Flowers based on nuisance. Nuisance is a type of harm where the D causes substantial interference with the P's quiet enjoyment of their real property. That property must be in the P's possession or immediate right to possession. At the time that P filed suit against Flowers he had been living in his home for three months and therefore did have possession of the property and a right to sue for nuisance.
Substantial interference
The substantial interference created by Flowers is the use of light that was "extremely bright, casting a glow far beyond Flowers' property". The quality of substantial is not measured by D's conduct, but by how great the impact would be on a reasonable, not hypersensitive person. Would a reasonable person find this to be highly objectionable? Harry will argue that not only are the lights extremely bright and disruptive to the enjoyment of the property when they are on, but he would point out that their light is "coming in his windows 24 hours a day"! There is no escaping the disruption that the lights cause. The interference is substantial.
Social utility v. harm
Courts will consider the circumstances of a nuisance in determining whether the harm should be allowed to continue. Factors that will be considered are the social utility to the community weighed against the harm. Flowers acknowledges the harm that the lights create, but will point out the social utility of keeping the business operational. Their business provides work to 20 workers and is successful. In a rural area, as such, that is an income to 20 people/families who live nearby which means employment for an area that will less likely have high employment opportunities such as a larger city. Those 20 jobs are important. The business cost $20 million to initiate and is successful. The service they provide, growing plants, is valuable to the community; otherwise they
???
would not have found such success. Furthermore, although there is a harm in the constancy of the lights, Flowers will show that the lights are bright at the greenhouse, but only put out a glow beyond their property. D will make known that they conform to industry standards in their operation. P could always shut their curtains at night and avoid the light. There is a value to the community which will likely outweigh the harm.
Alternatives
Although, there is a value to the community P will argue that perhaps the company can make modifications or adjustments that would allow the social utility, but help to eliminate the harm. P is requesting that the lights be turned off. D could also turn the lights another direction or create barriers between the greenhouse and the residential areas of the town to minimize the impact on the P. D should show reasonable efforts to minimize the harm in order to continue.
DEFENSES
Coming to the harm
Generally, D may argue that P came to the harm if the harm existed before P encountered it. This is a type of assumption of the risk analysis. Here, Flowers had built the greenhouse facility in an area appropriate for the factory. They built "in a rural area twenty miles outside of the city". As the town expanded and grew closer, Flowers then put up signs to warn "prospective residents" of the light created by the business. Given the efforts to build away from a town and the warning that Flowers put forth, then prospective residents, such as Harry who saw the signs, cannot say that he did not have knowledge and awareness of the harm. He was warned and chose to voluntarily encounter the interference anyway.
P will argue that although he saw the signs he did not fully understand the scope of the harm. He "figured the light could not be that bad". One who comes to the harm may still sue so long as their reason for coming to the harm is not to sue. P clearly did not
??
move to the area with a full appreciation of the interference of the lights and therefore may bring suit against Flowers and likely prevail.
2) REMEDIES FOR HARRY
Injunction
Harry will likely request an injunction. An injunction is an equitable remedy in which the court orders the D to stop doing something. In this case, P will request that the courts have D shut off the lights that are causing the substantial interference. D will again argue that the lights are pertinent to their operation. Many of the plants grown require more light than is naturally available and will not grow without it, which will impact the business. They meet industry standards and should not be required to shut down or suffer impacts to their operation.
D will likely prevail here.
Perhaps, alternatives may be sought as mentioned above in which D can help to remedy the situation by putting up lighting. In some cases, when one comes to the area and this forces a result on D, P can bear some of the cost of remedy.
Legal remedies
P may seek damages for the harm caused or for dealing with the future harm of the interference. If P's have to move or get curtains, etc., P will seek to be compensated for this.
P will likely prevail here.
Note: Public Nuisance
Private nuisance varies from public nuisance in that the substantial interference is to the health and safety of the community at large and the P would have to suffer a harm that is unique to the rest of the community. Here, P is suffering from the same burden of the
???
lights that affects the rest of the community and there is no apparent threat to health or safety; therefore private nuisance would not be applicable.

QUESTION 2
Will asked Steve, a professional assassin, to kill Adam, a business rival, and Steve accepted. Before Steve was scheduled to kill Adam, Will heard that Adam's business was failing. Will told Steve that he had changed his mind and no longer wanted him to kill Adam, but Steve responded that he was going to kill Adam anyway.
Steve assaulted Adam late at night on a dark, deserted street. Adam resisted so vigorously as to put Steve's life at risk. Steve finally overcame Adam's resistance and succeeded in killing him.
1. What charges can reasonably be brought against Steve? Discuss. 2. What charges can reasonably be brought against Will? Discuss.

QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER A 1. CHARGES AGAINST STEVE (S)
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT MURDER
Conspiracy is when two or more people agree together to do an unlawful act or to do a lawful for act for an unlawful purpose, and in most jurisdictions, the conspiracy begins with the agreement and includes doing an overt act in furtherance of that conspiracy.
Here, S was asked to kill someone by W and he "accepted," so this is an agreement between them to commit the killing, which is an unlawful act. He did an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy to kill by assaulting Adam late at night, showing that he sought Adam out with the intent to kill him. S may be charged with conspiracy.
PINKERTON RULE
provides that all co-conspirators are liable for all crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy, no matter which conspirator does the unlawful act.
Here, S does the act, so his co-conspirators will be liable for his crimes.
WHARTON's RULE
provides that there must be at least one more person involved in the conspiracy than the number of people required to carry out the target unlawful act.
Here, it only takes one person to kill another, and there are two conspirators here, S and W, so this requirement is met for this conspiracy.
MERGER
provides that certain lesser included crimes may be merged into the larger crime, so that one may be charged with all but only may be convicted of the larger crime.

Here, S may be charged with both conspiracy and with murder as discussed below; however, conspiracy does not merge, so he will still be liable for both the conspiracy to commit murder and for the murder as discussed below.
ASSAULT
is the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of the unlawful application of force that would result in harmful or offensive touching or physical injury.
Here, the facts tell us that S "assaulted" Adam so we can assume this is true, so he would be liable for that assault.
BATTERY
is the intentional and unlawful application of force that results in harmful or offensive touching or physical injury.
Here, the facts tell us that S "assaulted" Adam so we can assume this includes the crime of battery, so he would be liable for that battery as well.
MERGER
is discussed above.
Here, the assault and battery will merge into the larger crime of murder as discussed below, so S may not be convicted of assault and/or in addition to the murder.
MURDER
is the unlawful killing (homicide) of another person.
FIRST-DEGREE MURDER
is murder that is either a premeditated, deliberated killing of another person or a killing that occurs during the commission of an underlying, independent inherently dangerous felony.

PREMEDITTED/DELIBERATED MURDER
is a homicide wherein the D intends to kill a person, has time to decide ahead of time to kill, and plans, premeditates doing the killing in a cool, calm manner.
Here, we are told that S is "a professional assassin," so he would be used to carrying out these killings in a planned, organized, and calm, cool manner. Here, he clearly accepts the solicitation to kill Adam, plans to do so and carries it out. S may be charged with first-degree, premeditated/deliberated murder of Adam.
DEFENSES TO MURDER - SELF-DEFENSE
A person may use reasonable, necessary force to defend oneself against attack from another person, and may use deadly force if the attack reasonably appears to endanger life or threatens serious bodily harm.
Here, S will assert that because Adam "resisted...vigorously" he had to fight back and therefore was defending himself. However, this defense will not succeed because S was the aggressor and planned to kill Adam.
FELONY MURDER
is a killing that occurs during the commission of an underlying, independent inherently dangerous felony.
Here, as discussed above, S has committed the felonies of assault and battery; however, because those charges will merge into the larger crime, they are not sufficient to support a felony murder charge because they are not independent of the murder felony.
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER
is all other killing besides FIRST-DEGREE MURDER and may be done with INTENT TO KILL, INTENT TO INFLICT GREAT BODILY HARM OR A DEPRAVED HEART KILLING.

INTENT TO KILL
is when the D subjectively desires to do the killing or knows with substantial certainty that death will result from his actions.
Here, if S is not convicted of FIRST-DEGREE MURDER, he may be charged with SECOND-DEGREE MURDER Intent to kill because he was a professional assassin, hired to do the killing and desired to kill Adam.
INTENT TO INFLICT GREAT BODILY HARM
may be demonstrated by the use of a deadly weapon or by other conduct intended to and known to inflict serious bodily injury.
Here, S has accosted Adam late at night in a dark street to kill him, so we can assume he either used a deadly weapon or otherwise knew how to inflict serious bodily injury, especially since he is a professional assassin.
DEPRAVED HEART KILLING
is one that is done with reckless disregard for a known risk to human life.
Here, again, because S is a professional, we can assume that he possessed this intent to kill with a depraved heart and reckless disregard for human life.
DEFENSES
are discussed above and will apply here the same.
VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
is when certain circumstances serve to mitigate a murder charge down to the lesser charge of voluntary manslaughter, either by adequate provocation or by an "imperfect self-defense."

ADEQUATE PROVOCATION/LACK OF COOLING-OFF
is when a specific event occurs to provoke D into killing, such that a reasonable person would be adequately outraged and provoked by the event, and D actually IS PROVOKED by this event -- and a reasonable person in that circumstance would not have time to "cool off" and just does the killing, and the D actually does not have time to "cool off" and does not in fact cool off.
Here, there is no indication of an event that would be sufficiently provoking to allow this mitigation, such as one finding their spouse engaged in a sexual act with another or one being attached with a substantial blow, etc. so this mitigation will not apply for S. The facts do not indicate any such circumstances here.
IMPERFECT SELF-DEFENSE MITIGATION
is a second circumstance that may mitigate a murder down to voluntary manslaughter, wherein the D has the right to defend himself against an attack but overreacts or otherwise exceeds the scope and level of the defense allowed because he has misjudged the situation somehow by mistake.
Here, the facts do not indicate any circumstance whereby this mitigation will apply for S because he is a professional killer and has no right to the defense of self-defense because he was the aggressor and planned the killing, regardless of the victim's attempt to protect himself.
INVOUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
is a killing of another person that is unintended and may be due to criminal negligence or may be a misdemeanor manslaughter.
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE
is when a duty is owed to the victim but the D so grossly deviates from the standard of care owed that a killing/death results even though D had no intent to kill.

Here, there are no facts which suggest this applies and S will not be charged with involuntary manslaughter by criminal negligence but will still be charged with murder as discussed above.
MISDEAMEANOR MANSLAUGHTER
is a killing that occurs during the commission of an underlying, independent NON- inherently dangerous felony or a misdemeanor.
Here, there are no facts which suggest this applies and S will not be charged with involuntary misdemeanor manslaughter but will still be charged with murder as discussed above.
2. CHARGES AGAINST WILL (W)
SOLICITATION FOR MURDER
is when one person asks or requests another person to do a killing of a person with the intent that the killing be done.
Here, the facts tell us that W asked S, a professional assassin, to kill Adam, a business rival. The solicitation was complete when W made the request to W, so he will be charged with solicitation.
ACCOMPLICE TO MURDER
An accomplice is one who aids, abets, or otherwise encourages a crime with the intent that the crime be committed. An accomplice may be charged with ALL CRIMES committed by the Principal [the one doing the unlawful act(s)], regardless of whether they were foreseeable or not or were in furtherance of the target crime or not.
Here, because W has solicited S to do the killing and encouraged him by the solicitation and giving him Adam's identity, he may be charged as an accomplice to the crimes committed by S.

MERGER
is discussed above and will apply here for W as applied above for S; the crimes of SOLICITATION and ACCOMPLICE will merge with the murder charge that will also apply to W.
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT MURDER
is discussed above and will also apply here to W; W will be liable for all crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy to commit murder.
DEFENSE - WITHDRAWAL
is when one party who has conspired to commit a crime decides to withdraw from the conspiracy and go no further to commit the target crime, so it may be a defense to a charge.
Here, W told S that he changed his mind and no longer wanted him to kill Adam. Communication to the other conspirators is required in order for a withdrawal to be effective and if so, then the party withdrawing may still be charged with the conspiracy but may escape the target crime charge. Had W told the police or otherwise tried to prevent the killing, some jurisdictions would have let him escape the conspiracy charge as well.

Steve
Conspiracy
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER B
?Conspiracy is when two or more parties agree to commit a crime. When Will asked Steve to kill Adam, "Steve accepted," strongly indicating an agreement between the two to commit the crime of murdering Adam. Modernly many jurisdictions also require an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. In this case, Steve's actual killing of Adam satisfies the element of an overt act. Conspiracy is also a specific intent crime, meaning that there must be the specific intent to carry out the crime in question. Here again, this element is strongly indicated by the fact that Steve did in fact kill Adam.
Steve is guilty of conspiracy. Conspiracy does not merge with any of the other crimes mentioned below.
Assault
An assault is an attempted battery or the threatening of another with an imminent battery. Here the fact pattern says that Steve assaulted Adam, though it is not clear if this means a legal assault or the more common meaning which is more akin to a battery. There was an attempt but because the killing/battery was actually successful Steve would be charged with the accomplished crimes rather than the attempts.
As there was a fight, it can logically be inferred that at some point before his death, Adam was placed in apprehension of an immediate battery by Steve. In this sense, he was assaulted.

Battery
A battery is the unlawful application of force to the person of another. Steve killed Adam. This was an unlawful application of force to Adam. Steve is guilty of battery.
Merger
If all the elements of one lesser crime are included in the elements of a greater crime, that crime merges with the greater. In this case, both assault and battery merge with murder which will be discussed below.
Homicide
Homicide is the killing of a human being by another human being. Adam was a human being. He was killed by Steve, another human being. There was a homicide.
Causation
In order to establish criminal liability it must be shown that the actions of the defendant were the actual and proximate cause of the victim's death. The facts only say that Steve...succeeded in killing him (Adam). This establishes actual and proximate causation.
Murder Malice
Liability for murder requires the element of malice with one of four possible bases: intent to kill, intent to inflict serious bodily harm, wanton or reckless conduct, or the felony murder rule.
In Steve's case, he had the intent to kill Adam. First, he "accepted" Will's request that he kill Adam. Second, he "responded that he was going to kill Adam..." Thirdly, Steve

overcame Adam's substantial, even life threatening, resistance and killed Adam. This struggle indicates intent on the part of Steve. Finally, it says that Steve "succeeded" in killing Adam, indicating that he had that desire or goal going into the event. It was his intent to kill Adam. There is also the fact that Steve is a professional assassin. This means that he kills people for a living. He has done it before. He knows how to do it. He is probably good at it. He has probably developed the mental coolness to deliberate over, plan and carry out these killings.
The intent to inflict serious bodily injury is included in the intent to kill.
Wanton and reckless conduct. This element likewise is included. To assault someone, struggle with them and eventually kill them is certainly wanton, a disregard of a known risk to human life, but it is also included in the first element of intent to kill.
The felony murder rule does not apply here because Steve was not committing any other felony other than the murder. The killing itself cannot be the felony upon which murder malice is established, it must be a distinct felony which is causally related to the killing.
First-Degree and Second-Degree Murder
Having established murder malice, a modern law court will proceed to consider if this is first-degree murder or second-degree murder. First-degree murder requires the elements of deliberation, and premeditation, or that the murder was accomplished by certain methods such as poison, torture, a trap, explosives, etc. First-degree murder can also be established by the felony murder rule.
In Steve's case, again from his acceptance of Will's request to kill Adam, and from his confirmation that he would kill Adam in spite of the fact that Steve no longer wanted him to kill Adam, deliberation and premeditation are strongly indicated. All the facts, though brief, indicate that Steve considered the killing. He thought about it in advance. It was

a conscious decision on his part, not something that he rushed into or decided at the last moment. Steve would be found guilty of first-degree murder.
There is also mention of a "schedule" to kill Adam. This schedule also indicates planning and deliberation. It also further corroborates the conspiracy.
Second-degree murder is all murder which is not first degree.
Mitigation to voluntary manslaughter
Murder can be mitigated to voluntary manslaughter due to the heat of passion defense, mistaken justification or excuse, coercion or diminished capacity. These elements do not apply.
Defenses:
Self-Defense -- a person may use any reasonable force to protect themselves from imminent bodily harm.
The only possible defense that Steve would claim is self-defense. It is true that Adam resisted and put Steve's life at risk. However, because Steve was the initial aggressor and because his intent was to kill Adam, this defense would not be allowed. Rather it was Adam who would have had the defense of self-defense if he had killed Steve in an attempt to protect himself.
Will
Solicitation - - solicitation is requesting, counseling or inciting another to commit a crime. Solicitation is a specific intent crime which is complete upon the act of the request, etc. Will "asked" Steve to kill Adam. He is guilty of solicitation. Solicitation is complete upon the act of requesting.
?
Accomplice liability
If a solicitation results in the other party attempting or committing the target crime, the solicitor is guilty as an accomplice. According to the rules of accomplice liability, the accomplice is liable for all the crimes of all the principals and all the accomplices which are carried out in furtherance of the target crime or are reasonably foreseeable results of the target crime.
An accomplice is required to have knowledge of the target crime. Here Will certainly had knowledge of Adam's murder because he requested Steve to do it. He also had to either solicit or assist in the target crime. Here Will solicited. He gave Steve the idea in the first place. Lastly, some courts require intent that the target crime be accomplished, indicated often by a corrupt stake in the venture. In this case, Will initially had the intent because he asked Steve to do it. Also he had a corrupt goal, to put a business competitor out of business. At least at the moment of solicitation, Will had the knowledge of the target crime and the intent that it would be accomplished.
Merger--solicitation merges with either the attempt, the commission of the target crime or with conspiracy. In this case, Will will be found to be an accomplice, thus liable for the target crime which was successfully accomplished. He will also likely be found liable for conspiracy (infra). So solicitation in his case merges.
Conspiracy--see definition supra--Will agreed with Steve that Steve would kill Adam. A modern court may look for some overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. Again, Steve's actions to kill Adam supply the necessary overt acts.
Pinkerton's Rule -- the general rule of conspiracy liability states that a coconspirator will be liable for all the crimes of all the conspirators which are accomplished in furtherance of the conspiracy or are a foreseeable result of the conspiracy. The murder of Adam was the clear and unique goal of the conspiracy, therefore, Will will be found liable for the first-degree murder of Adam, unless he has some valid defense.

Defenses:
Withdrawal
Will would argue that he withdrew from the conspiracy before the actual target crime was attempted and accomplished. In order for a withdrawal to be valid and to excuse a coconspirator from the future crimes of the conspiracy, it is necessary that, one, the coconspirator notify the other conspirators of their withdrawal. In this case, Will notified Steve. He said that he had changed his mind and that he no longer wanted Steve to kill Adam. However, in addition most courts will require that the defendant have thwarted the success of the conspiracy in circumstances indicating a complete and voluntary withdrawal from the criminal purpose. In other words, Will would have had to either somehow stop Steve himself, or notify the legal authorities so that Steve would be stopped from killing Adam. Absent such thwarting, Will's withdrawal is ineffective, and he will be liable for the murder of Adam on the basis of accomplice liability and conspiracy liability.

QUESTION 3
Jane, a babysitter, took three 6-year-old children-Abe, Betty, and Carl-to the playground.
Abe ran through flower beds bordering the playground. Gary, a groundskeeper, yelled at Abe, "Hey, get out of the flower beds!," and threw a rock at him. Abe ducked, and the rock missed him.
Betty climbed the ladder at the back of a metal slide manufactured and sold by Slideco. The surface of the slide became very hot on typical summer days. That day was a typical summer day and the slide's surface reached a temperature of 140 degrees. As she went down the slide, Betty sustained burns on her legs.
Carl began to kick a soccer ball. Jane was too occupied texting on her cell phone to notice that Carl had kicked the ball into the street and was running to retrieve it. A motorist, who was driving 40 miles per hour despite a posted limit of 25 miles per hour, struck Carl and injured him.
1. Under what theory or theories, if any, might Abe bring an action for damages against Gary? Discuss.
2. Under what theory or theories, if any, might Betty bring an action for damages against Slideco? Discuss.
3. Under what theory or theories, if any, might Carl bring an action for damages against Jane? Discuss.

1. Abev.Gary
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER A
?Assault - It's the intentional placement of apprehension of a harmful or offensive touching of the person of another without consent or justification.
Here, Gary, "yelled" at Abe. Gary said "Hey, get out of the flower beds!" Gary picked up a rock and "threw the rock at him." Thus. Gary is showing intent to place Abe in an immediate apprehension (Gary was yelling at him as he was throwing the rock at Abe) of an immediate harm. A rock thrown by an adult at a child may cause serious harm.
Abe, was aware Gary was yelling at him and he was also aware that Gary "threw a rock" because Abe "ducked" the rock. Abe did not consent, nor Gary seems to have a legal justification since the use of violence seems excessive force to be used to "protect" flowers.
Therefore, Gary will be liable for assault.
Defenses - Defense of property - Gary may argue he was protecting the flowers in the public park.
This defense will fail since this force was not reasonable to protect flowers in a public park.
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
It's the intentional outrageous conduct that intends to inflict emotional distress and does cause severe emotional distress.
Here, Abe will argue that a 6 year old child is very sensitive to the conducts of adults. The yelling and throwing of a rock were intentional behaviors. Gary was trying to inflict
???????????
emotional distress on a child who was just playing in the park. A 6 year old child playing at the park on a summer day would not expect such an outrageous behavior from an adult. Abe did duck when Gary threw the rock. Gary will argue that his behavior did not cause Abe severe emotional distress.
The court would agree with Gary since the facts do not state Abe suffered severe emotional distress.
Therefore, Gary would not be liable for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
2. Bettyv.Slideco Products Liability Negligence
A defendant, like Slideco, would be held liable for negligence, if the plaintiff, Betty, can prove that there was a duty owed to her, that Slideco breached that duty, the breach of that duty was the actual and proximate cause of Betty's injuries.
Duty - Any manufacturer that places a product in the stream of commerce has the duty to do so safely, as any other manufacturer would under the same or similar circumstances.
Previously, duty was owed only within the privity of the two parties. Modernly, privity is not necessary.
Defendant
Here, Slideco, is the manufacturer and seller of the metal slide; therefore it is the proper defendant.
???????????
Plaintiff
A slide made and sold to a city park, is intended for the use and enjoyment of children. Betty, is a 6 year old girl, who frequents the park to play on the slide. Therefore, Betty is a proper plaintiff.
Slideco owed a duty to Betty, to have made and sold a safe slide.
Breach - It's the action that falls below the standard of care owed by defendant (Slideco) to defendant (Betty).
Design Defect - It's the defect that the manufacturer incurs when the product is manufactured according to the design but it is unsafe.
Here, the metal slide was manufactured according to design specifications. The metal slide, reached very high (140) temperatures on "typical summer days." This is a design problem, since during "typical summer days" the slide was too dangerous for children to use.
Utility/risk test - Would a different design have solved this problem?
Maybe a different material like wood, would have been a better choice. Definitely, the risk of having children burned is too high for the utility of a slide, that is supposed to provide fun and enjoyment to children.
Warning Defect - Slideco could have warned children, parents, of the risks of burning if the summer days were so hot that created the slide unusable.
This warning may not be sufficient since many children that use a slide may not read a sign before sliding down, nor they may know how to read. Also, children may choose to ignore the sign since having fun is more important and they may not be able to appreciate the risks involved.
??????
Causation
Actual Cause - But for the metal slide reached 140 in a typical summer day, Betty would not have burned her legs.
Thus, Slideco's metal slide, is the actual cause of Betty's burns.
Proximate cause - It is foreseeable that a metal slide that reaches temperatures of 140 on summer days, would burn a child's legs while sliding down.
There are not intervening events.
Therefore, the metal slide is the proximate cause of Betty's injuries.
Damages - Betty suffered burns on her legs. This is a foreseeable kind of injuries for sliding down a hot metal slide. Also, pain and suffering, specials, medical bills, and out of pocket.
Defenses
Industry Common Practice - Slideco may argue that metal is a reasonable material to use for slides, and that other companies also use metal to make slides.
This defense will fail since in this city on "typical summer days" the metal slide reaches unsafe temperatures.
Contributory Negligence - Betty
Slideco may argue Betty contributed by going down the slide even though it was hot.
Defense will fail, since Betty is a 6 year old child, that may not know about the danger of a hot slide.
????????
Contributory Negligence - Jane
Slideco may argue that Jane, the babysitter, in locus parentis, was contributorily negligent since she did allow Betty to go down a hot slide.
Defense will fail since contributory negligence of Jane cannot be applied to Betty. Therefore, Slideco will be held liable for Betty's injuries under this theory.
Warranty -
Implied Merchantability
Every merchant that sells a product impliedly warranties the safe use of the product for the intended use. This warranty is that the product is of fair and average quality for the use intended.
Breach - Slideco, breached this warranty by placing a product unsafe for the intended use, and of less than fair and average quality. Defect discussed supra.
Causation - discussed supra
Damages - discussed supra.
Therefore, Slideco will be also liable under this theory.
Strict liability in Torts
Any merchant/seller will be held liable as operation of law, for placing a defective product in the commerce.
Breach - Discussed supra Causation - Discussed supra
???????????
Damages - Discussed supra.
Since Slideco manufactured and sold the design/warranty defective metal slide and placed it in the stream of commerce, Slideco will also be liable under this theory.
Defenses - According to the facts, there are not applicable defenses for Slideco.
3. Carlv.Jane
Negligence - Omission to act
As a general rule, one does not have a duty to act in benefit of another unless there is a special circumstance that would constitute an exception to this rule.
Special Relationships - One of the exceptions is when there is a special relationship between the plaintiff (Carl) and the defendant (Jane).
Locus Parentis - Here Jane was the babysitter of Carl. A babysitter is deemed to step up in place of a parent when the parent is not present, to take care of a child (Carl).
Therefore, Jane, had the duty to take care of Carl just like his parents would. Per Contract - Jane, was also contracted and paid for, to take care of Carl. Therefore, Jane owed a duty to care to watch and take care of him.
Breach - Did Jane breach her duty?
Here the facts stated that she was "too occupied texting on her cellphone to notice Carl."
?????????????
Jane needed to act as a reasonable babysitter would have under the same or similar circumstances.
Carl had a ball. Carl was 6 years old, and there was a street by the park. Jane should have been paying attention to what Carl was doing. She acted below the standard and reasonable way. Therefore, Jane breached her duty to Carl.
Causation
Actual cause - "But for" Jane being distracted on her cell phone, she would have seen Carl kicking the ball and running to the street.
Therefore, Jane's omission to act was the actual cause.
Proximate cause - It is foreseeable that if Jane is not watching what Carl, a 6 year old is doing, when he kicks the ball to the street and runs after it, he would get hit by a car.
Jane, will argue that the motorist driving 15 miles over the speed limit was an independent intervening event that should cut off her liability.
Carl, will argue that it is foreseeable for motorists to drive above the speed limit, and therefore, Jane should have been more careful in watching Carl as he played with ball by the street.
Therefore, Jane's omission to act is the proximate cause of Carl's injuries.
Damages - Carl was hit by a car so he will get generals, past, present and future pain and suffering, specials, hospital and doctor's bills, and any other out of pocket.
Defenses - Contributory Negligence of Carl. Jane may argue Carl owed himself a duty to keep himself safe and he acted below the standard of care owed to himself.
?????????
Defense will fail since Carl is just a 6 year old child.
Negligence per se of motorist
Will fail since we cannot apply his negligence to Carl.
?
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER B
1) UNDER WHAT THEORIES MIGHT ABE BRING AN ACTION FOR DAMAGES AGAINST GARY?
ABE V. GARY
ASSAULT
An assault is a voluntary act with intent to cause apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive touching that does cause reasonable apprehension resulting in damages.
Here G threw a rock at A after yelling "Hey, get out of the flower beds!". The act of his bodily movement to throw the rock satisfies the first element because it was completely voluntary.
G threw the rock in the direction of A to get him to leave the flower beds. G would argue he did not intend for A to be placed in fear of being struck by the rock when he threw but to merely get his attention. This is a weak argument because G would have been substantially certain that after getting a six year old child's attention by yelling at him and throwing a rock in his direction the child would be placed in apprehension of the rock hitting him which satisfies the intent element.
Here reasonable apprehension is present because A ducked after the rock was thrown specifically to avoid it hitting him; therefore it is shown he was in fear of being struck by the rock.
The damages present in this case is the fear the child felt from being hit by the rock.
DEFENSES
DEFENSE OF PROPERTY
??
Defense of property allows the reasonable use of force to defend one's property. Deadly force is never authorized.
Here G would state defense of property was valid because A was walking in the flower beds which would destroy and damage them. G was the groundskeeper in charge of maintaining the park and as such had control of the property. This is a weak argument because there were no signs or any indication stating for A to not enter them and it would have been reasonable for G to have stopped at only yelling at A to get out of the flowers because there was no indication he would not do so after being told making the further use of force unreasonable.
CONCLUSION
The court would most likely find G liable for assault.
2) UNDER WHAT THEORIES MIGHT BETTY BRING AN ACTION FOR DAMAGES AGAINST SLIDECO?
BETTY V. SLIDECO
STRICT PRODUCTS LIABILITY
Strict products liability is present when a product is placed in commerce that was defective in some way from the manufacturer and that product causes harm to a foreseeable plaintiff.
PROPER PLAINTIFF
A proper plaintiff is any foreseeable consumer, user, or bystander of the product. Privity is not required between the parties.
Here B would be a foreseeable user of the product because the slide was manufactured to be used in playgrounds where children like her play and therefore she would be a proper plaintiff. S would argue the owner of the playground was the buyer and that S
?
did not have privity with them but this is invalid because privity is not required but only that she was a foreseeable user.
PROPER DEFENDANT
A proper defendant for SPL is any member of the regular chain of commerce from manufacturer to the retailer who sells the product.
Here S is the manufacturer of the metal slide at the playground and as such they would be a proper defendant for strict products liability.
TYPE OF DEFECT
The following types of defect are actionable under strict products liability: manufacturer defect, design defect, and failure to warn defect.
MANUFACTURER DEFECT
A manufacturer defect is present when the product is in a different state than similar products made at the same time by the manufacturer. This is also stated as it was not manufactured as intended.
Here there are no facts which indicate that the slide was not made as it was intended to be and as such there is no manufacturer defect present.
DESIGN DEFECT
A design defect is present when the product was made as it was intended to be but there is still a defect present.
Here B would state there was a design defect because the slide was made out of a metal that would become extremely hot when placed in the sun.

RISK V. UTILITY TEST
The risk v. utility test compares the risk of the harm suffered by the defect and the utility of the product as designed in order to determine if there is a design defect.
Here S would state the utility of using metal for the slide was high because it is a durable material that would hold up to the elements and prolonged use and abuse from children over a long period of time. They would state those who purchase the product would not want to have to continuously replace it because it was not made from a very durable material and as such there is a significant utility for the use of metal.
B would counter this by stating the risk of a child being burned by the metal when using the slide is extremely high because traditionally more people go to parks and use the slide during times when the weather is warmer, creating a large probability that they would encounter the slide when it was very hot from prolonged sun exposure. S could counter stating the slide could be placed in an area that is shaded to avoid this but this is a weak argument because it is foreseeable that the slide would be placed in direct sunlight.
CONSUMER EXPECTATION TEST
The consumer expectation test used the standard of what the average ordinary consumer would expect of the product in order to determine if there was design defect.
Here S would argue a reasonable consumer would expect the slide to be durable to last and afford the children the opportunity to use it at a play area which is met by the current design. B would counter stating the reasonable consumer would expect that children would be able to use the slide safely without fear of being burned to include the peak times of use when the slide would be extremely hot due to sun exposure and as such the current design would fail to meet the consumer expectation test.

REASONABLE ALTERNATIVE DESIGN
This test examines if there is a reasonable alternative design that could have been used by the manufacturer in order to avoid the defect that is claimed.
Here B would state there was a defect because a different material could have been reasonably used to make the slide that would not have been subject to becoming so hot as to cause burns from merely sliding down it. S would counter stating the reasonableness of an alternative material is not known because no facts state if there would be increased costs or change the time of manufacture. B would counteroffer manufacturers produce slides made of plastic material which does not become as hot and as such provide a reasonable alternative.
STATE OF THE ART
This test determines if there is any technological advances in the field the defendant should have been aware of in determining a design defect.
No facts are present to determine that there was any state of the art technology and as such this test in not effective in this case.
FAILURE TO WARN
Failure to warn defect is present when there is an inadequate warning of a danger related to the product that would not be considered to be common knowledge to the public.
Here B would state there was a failure to warn because there was no warning present on the metal slide that it would become severely hot and cause burns when exposed to direct heat and sunlight for a long period. S would counter stating this would be general knowledge and as such should not require the warning. B would counter stating it would not be reasonable to believe a 6 year old would understand the danger and a warning was required.

CAUSATION
Causation is required to show the design was the cause of the harm suffered. This requires the elements of actual cause and proximate cause.
ACTUAL CAUSE
Actual cause is found by using the "but for" test or by determining if it was a substantial factor in causing the harm.
Here B would state the defect was the actual cause of her harm because but for the use of the metal or lack of a warning she would not have been burned when sliding down the slide.
PROXIMATE CAUSE
Proximate cause is present when the harm suffered is a foreseeable consequence of the defect with no intervening acts breaking the chain of causation.
B would argue the defect was the proximate cause of her harm because it is foreseeable a child would burn themselves sliding down a slide in the direct sun that was made of metal and with no warning of the danger of it being that hot.
DAMAGES
Damages in strict products liability must be foreseeable to the situation and must be more than merely economic.
Here B suffered burns from sliding down a hot metal slide which would be foreseeable; therefore they qualify as damages.
DEFENSES ASSUMPTION OF RISK
?
Assumption of risk is a complete bar to recovery that requires the plaintiff: 1) knew of the risk, 2) voluntarily encountered the risk, and 3) appreciated the scope of the risk.
Here S would argue that it would be common knowledge for anyone to know of the risk of using a metal slide in the direct sun and that B voluntarily encountered the slide at the playground. B would counter saying as a six year old child she did not truly appreciate the scope of the risk and as such would not have assumed the risk.
CONCLUSION
The court would most likely find S liable for strict products liability due to design defect and failure to warn.
NEGLIGENCE
Negligence is an unintentional tort in which a party is harmed due to the defendant's failure to exercise the reasonable standard of care under the circumstances and requires the elements of duty, breach, causation, and damages.
DUTY
Duty is the reasonable standard of care under the circumstances and is often stated as what the defendant could have done to prevent the harm. Under the Cardozo view a duty is only owed to those in the zone of danger who were foreseeably harmed. Under the Andrews view a duty is owed to everyone.
Here B would state S owed her a duty to make a slide that was safe for her to use because she was a foreseeable user of their product. B would argue there was a high enough degree risk of her being injured by the slide if it was not made safely that this duty should be present. S would claim there was no privity between the parties which would cause no duty. This is an invalid argument because as a foreseeable user of the slide B would be properly owed a duty.
??
BREACH
A breach is present when the defendant fails to uphold the reasonable standard of care under the circumstances. This is typically stated as what a reasonable person would have done.
LEARNED HAND DOCTRINE
This doctrine compares the probability of harm and the burden placed on the defendant to act differently in order to determine if there was a breach.
Here B would argue the probability that a child using the slide would be burned by it being too hot is so high in comparison to the burden that would be placed on S to manufacture the slide out of a different material that a reasonable person in their position would have done so. S would counter stating the economic burden would be high to invest in the material and research and that this would be an undue burden. B would counter stating this would be a one time cost and it would be offset by the decrease in harm caused to children.
CAUSATION
See supra
ACTUAL CAUSE See supra
B would argue the breach was the actual cause of her harm because but for the slide being made the way it was she would not have been harmed. S would argue the placing of the slide in direct sunlight was the actual cause of her harm and not the metal. This is a weak argument because the slide being made of metal was a substantial factor in causing her injuries and as such would qualify as the actual cause.
PROXIMATE CAUSE See supra

B would argue the breach was the proximate cause of her harm because it is foreseeable a child would be burned sliding down the slide when it is highly susceptible to heat.
DAMAGES
See supra
Here B suffered burns from sliding down the slide which are foreseeable to the circumstances.
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
A complete bar to recovery if the plaintiff is found to have contributed to their harm no matter how slight.
S would argue B contributed to her harm because she did not check the slide to see if it was too hot to slide down prior to using the slide and that by doing so she had the last clear chance to avoid the harm. B would counter stating it would not be reasonable to hold a six year old to this standard.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE.
Comparative negligence states a plaintiff may still recover the percentage of the defendant's negligence. Pure comparative negligence states they may recover whatever the defendant's percentage is. The other form states so long as they were not more negligent than the defendant they will still be able to recover the defendant's percentage.
S would make the same arguments as discussed supra in contributory negligence with the same counter arguments made.
?
ASSUMPTION OF RISK
See supra
Here S would argue that it would be common knowledge for anyone to know of the risk of using a metal slide in the direct sun and that B voluntarily encountered the slide at the playground. B would counter saying as a six year old child she did not truly appreciate the scope of the risk and as such would not have assumed the risk.
CONCLUSION
The court would most likely find S liable for negligence and award under the appropriate contributory or comparative negligence doctrine.
IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY
An implied warranty of merchantability states the product is fit for its normal use.
Here B would argue the implied warranty was breached when she was burned because the normal use of a slide would be for a child to play on it safely. Therefore it being made of a material which caused her to be easily burned was a breach of this warranty because it was foreseeable she would use the slide during a hot day.
DEFENSES ASSUMPTION OF RISK
See supra
Here S would argue that it would be common knowledge for anyone to know of the risk of using a metal slide in the direct sun and that B voluntarily encountered the slide at the playground. B would counter saying as a six year old child she did not truly appreciate the scope of the risk and as such would not have assumed the risk.
???
CONCLUSION
The court would most likely find S liable for breach of implied warranty of merchantability.
3) UNDER WHAT THEORY MIGHT CARL BRING AN ACTION FOR DAMAGES AGAINST JANE?
CARL V. JANE NEGLIGENCE
See supra
DUTY
See supra
Here C would state J owed him a duty to properly supervise him at the park.
SPECIAL DUTY: SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP
Typically there is no requirement to supervise another unless a special relationship is present.
Here J was the babysitter who voluntarily assumed the care of C and took him to the park. This would create a duty present for J to provide proper supervision and care of C as a six year old child entrusted in her care.
BREACH
See supra
LEARNED HAND DOCTRINE See supra
??
Here C would argue the risk of harm to a six year old child not being properly supervised at a park that borders a street is so high compared to the burden of the caregiver to pay proper attention to them that a reasonable person would avoid allowing themselves to be distracted by texting.
CAUSATION
See supra
ACTUAL CAUSE See supra
Here C would argue J's breach was the actual cause of her harm because but for her texting and not paying attention he would not have been injured in the accident. J would argue the actual cause was the driver speeding. This is a weak argument because her not paying attention was a substantial factor in causing the harm and qualifies as actual cause.
PROXIMATE CAUSE See supra
C would argue the breach was the proximate cause of his harm because it is foreseeable a child would be injured running off at a park when not properly supervised.
DAMAGES
See supra
C suffered physical injury from an accident due to not being supervised properly which is foreseeable.

DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
See supra
J would argue C contributed to his harm by running in the street without looking and as such contributed to his harm. C would counter that it would be unreasonable to expect this of a normal 6 year old child chasing a ball.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
See supra
J would make the same arguments as discussed supra with the same counter argument.
ASSUMPTION OF RISK
See supra
J would argue C knew of the risk of running into the street and did so voluntarily. C would counter by stating a six year old child could not be held to appreciate the scope of the risk present and as such would not have assumed the risk.
CONCLUSION
The court would most likely find J liable for negligence.
??
QUESTION 4
On February 1, Wholesaler called Manufacturer and ordered 100,000 widgets at $5 apiece for delivery on February 8. Manufacturer, who knew that Wholesaler was buying the widgets in order to resell them to retailers, said, "It's a deal." Wholesaler immediately entered into contracts to resell them for $15 apiece.
On February 2, Wholesaler sent Manufacturer a signed formal memorandum confirming the agreement and setting forth all its terms. In listing the terms, Wholesaler misstated the price as $6 apiece and added an additional term-that any dispute was subject to binding arbitration.
On February 3, Manufacturer received and read the memorandum. Manufacturer was surprised by the arbitration term, which was rare in the industry. Manufacturer did not respond to the memorandum.
On February 8, Manufacturer discovered that the market price of widgets had climbed to $25 apiece and refused to deliver them to Wholesaler. Although substitute widgets were available for $25 apiece, Wholesaler did not have the cash or credit to buy them.
On February 28, Wholesaler sued Manufacturer for breach of contract. 1. Is Wholesaler likely to prevail in its suit? Discuss.
2. What remedies, if any, may Wholesaler reasonably seek? Discuss.

Applicable Law
QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER A
?The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) applies to the sale of goods, which are tangible, movable personal property identified to the contract at the time of formation.
The transaction here pertains to the purchase and sale of 100,000 widgets, which are tangible and movable goods that had been named in the contract at formation.
Therefore, the UCC will apply to this transaction.
Merchants
A merchant is a person in the business or profession to which the goods or contract pertains, and those who hold themselves out as having expertise in such goods. Merchants are held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing, and certain sections of the UCC apply only to merchants.
Here, both Wholesaler and Manufacturer are in the widget business. Manufacturer actually makes the widgets and sells them, while Wholesaler resells them to retailers.
Therefore, both Wholesaler and Manufacturer
WHOLESALER (W) V. MANUFACTURER (M)
Contract formation
Contract formation requires a valid offer, a valid acceptance, consideration, and no valid defenses.
???
Offer
An offer is the manifestation of present contractual intent, using definite and certain terms, communicated to the offeree.
When W called M and ordered 100,000 widgets on February 1, he specified all the material terms and would be sufficient to make a valid offer as follows:
Quantity - 100,000
Time of performance - Delivery on February 8 Identity of parties - W and M
Price - $5 each, or $500,000 in total
Subject matter - purchase of widgets
The UCC only requires that the quantity term be specified, although the terms of W's offer include much more detail. Because W communicated these specific terms to M, there was a valid offer.
Acceptance
An acceptance under the UCC is any seasonable expression of acceptance (under common law it would be the unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer).
When M said "it's a deal" they expressed and communicated their assent to W's offer. Therefore, there was a valid acceptance.
Consideration
Consideration is a bargained for exchange of legal benefits and detriments.
???
The consideration here was the promise of 100,000 widgets for the promise to pay $500,000.
Therefore, there was valid consideration. Note that when W immediately entered into contracts to the widgets for $15 apiece, when M "knew that" W was buying them for resale, this would be foreseeable detrimental reliance. However, foreseeable detrimental reliance is relevant at the offer stage only when consideration is lacking, which is not the case here.
Terms of Agreement - Section 2-207 - Additional Terms
Under UCC Section 2-207, additional terms that are included in an acceptance between merchants become part of the contract so long as the offer was not limited to the terms of the offer, the terms are not material, and the offeror does not timely object.
On February 2, when W sent M a signed formal memorandum confirming the agreement and setting forth all its terms, W included an additional term that any dispute was subject to binding arbitration. This was an additional term because such a term was not discussed prior to this memo. As noted supra, both W and M are merchants. There was nothing in the offer precluding the new term or otherwise limiting the terms to those stated in the offer, and M did not object to the new term even though he was surprised by it and thus aware of it. However, since such an arbitration clause term was "rare in the industry", and terms that dictate how and when a claim for breach must be settled, it is likely a material term. As such, it will be excluded from the contract.
W might argue that M had a chance to respond to it but failed to do so, and therefore should be barred from later raising the issue. But M may have presumed the term to be excluded because it was material. A court would have to decide if M's knowledge and lack of response was in essence a "waiver" of their ability to exclude the term.
?
Defense to Formation - Statute of Frauds
A contract for the sale of goods of $500 or more must be in writing to be enforceable.
The contract here was for $500,000, and therefore must be in writing to be enforceable. There are, however, various exceptions under the UCC that will take the contract "outside" the statute of frauds, such as a merchant confirmatory memo.
Merchant Confirmatory Memo Exception
When a merchant receives a written and signed confirmatory memo regarding a prior oral agreement, they must respond to the memo within 10 days or be barred from raising the statute of frauds as a defense.
Here, when W sent M a signed formal memorandum confirming the agreement and setting forth all its terms, this satisfied the statute of frauds because M did not reply to it.
Therefore, the statute of frauds is satisfied.
Defense to Formation - Mistake / Scrivener's Error
A mistake in contract formation may allow a party to avoid contractual obligations when the error goes to the essence of the contract.
Here, there was a scrivener's error in that W misstated the price as $6 apiece rather than the $5 apiece as was agreed to in the phone call earlier. This is a minor error and can be corrected via reformation, and does not go to the essence of the contract. See infra. for discussion of the error and parole evidence.
Therefore, this mistake will not bar contract formation nor make the contract voidable.
???
Conditions
A condition is an act or state of affairs that must be met before a party's performance obligation matures.
W must show that it met all of its performance obligations in order to due M, so that M's performance obligations were actually due. W's only obligation appears to be to "stand ready" to perform its obligation of paying the money it will owe for the widgets. Normally deliver of goods is required before payment. Therefore, as long as W was able to "tender" the payment, and stood ready to do so, they fulfilled their conditions.
Therefore, W met its conditions.
Breach / Anticipatory Breach
Breach occurs when a party fails to meet their contractual obligation. An anticipatory breach occurs when a party to a contract states in unequivocal terms that they will not meet their contractual obligation, prior to the time performance is due. This allows the other party to no longer stand ready to fulfill their own obligations, and to sue for breach either immediately or when performance becomes due.
On February 8, when M discovered the market price of widgets had climbed to $25 apiece and "refused to deliver them" to the W, it was a breach. Because performance was actually due on February 8, it was not an anticipatory breach but just a typical breach. Therefore, unless M has some excuse for not fulfilling their contractual obligations, they will be in breach of contract.
M will try to raise the following to excuse their breach, but will fail.
??
Impossibility
A party will be excused from performance if their performance obligations become objectively impossible.
M may claim that because the price of widgets rose so dramatically, they could not perform. This will fail because they had the widgets and merely wanted to make a larger profit. There was nothing impossible about delivering them.
Therefore, the defense of impossibility will fail.
Impractability
A party may be excused from performance when the performance obligation becomes commercially impracticable.
M may claim that because the price of widgets rose so dramatically, their delivery of them to W was not practical. Again, this defense will fail because they had the widgets and merely wanted to make a larger profit. They are in the business of widgets and aware that prices fluctuate, and thus are acting in bad faith by not delivering them as agreed to in the contract.
Therefore, the defense of impracticability will fail.
Frustration of Purpose
A party may avoid contractual obligations in the purpose of the contract becomes frustrated in a manner foreseeable by both parties and contract formation.
This defense would fail for the same reasons noted supra.
???
Breach / Anticipatory Breach
Breach occurs when a party fails to meet their contractual obligation. An anticipatory breach occurs when a party to a contract states in unequivocal terms that they will not meet their contractual obligation, prior to the time performance is due. This allows the other party to no longer stand ready to fulfill their own obligations, and to sue for breach either immediately or when performance becomes due.
On February 8, when M discovered the market price of widgets had climbed to $25 apiece and "refused to deliver them" to the W, it was a breach. Because performance was actually due on February 8, it was not an anticipatory breach but just a typical breach. Therefore, unless M had some excuse for not fulfilling their contractual obligations, which as noted supra they did not, they will be in breach of contract.
Therefore, M is in breach of contract.
REMEDIES AVAILABLE TO WHOLESALER
General Damages / Expectation Damages
W will seek the expectation damages represented by the difference between the market value of the widgets at the time of breach, which was $25, and the contract price of $5.
Parol Evidence
Under the parol evidence rule, evidence of a prior oral or written agreement, or contemporaneous oral agreement, will be excluded if it adds to, varies or contradicts the terms of a fully integrated contract.
M may argue the actual price as written in the confirmatory memo is $6, not $5, and that remedy (if any) should be based on this amount. W will note this was just a scrivener's
????
error. Generally, a court will allow the parol evidence to show that a basic terms was written down incorrectly, especially because the UCC is liberally construed.
Therefore, W will likely be allowed to bring in the earlier phone call and agreement that set the price at $5 apiece.
Special Damages / Consequential Damages / Hadley v. Baxendale
Special damages that are foreseeable (as under Hadley v. Baxendale) at the time of formation by both parties may be collected as a remedy as well. Here, M knew that W was buying for resale, although they may not have known they would be reselling them for $15 apiece.
W will be better off with the differential in market price ($25) and the contract price ($5), and will thus successfully sue for that amount.
Cover
Cover under the UCC is when the buyer goes to market to replace the goods that were not delivered due to breach. Here, W cannot afford the widgets at the new price and cover is not an option for them. However, they will be able to get the differential between the market value at time of breach and the contract price as noted above.
Incidental Damages
W may also recover incidental damages.
???
Specific Performance
Specific performance may be allowed for unique goods when the remedy at law is insufficient. The widgets are available elsewhere and are therefore not unique. Therefore, specific performance will not be allowed.
?
QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER B
Wholesaler v. Manufacturer
The rights and remedies of the parties will depend on whether there was an enforceable contract in place. A contract is a promise or set of promises that the law will recognize as a duty and for whose breach the law will provide a remedy. To be enforceable a contract must have a valid offer which is accepted and supported by consideration, a bargained for exchange.
UCC
Under contract law, Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code governs the sale of goods. A good is a movable, tangible object at the time of identification to the contract.
Here, the contract is for goods because the wholesaler is purchasing widgets which are movable and tangible.
Therefore, the UCC will govern here.
MERCHANTS
Under the UCC, merchants are held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing and may have special requirements. A merchant is someone who regularly trades in the goods of the contract or otherwise holds himself out as knowledgeable in the goods of the contract.
Here, the seller is a merchant because they are a manufacturer of widgets. The buyer is also a merchant because [he] is a wholesaler that regularly sales widgets.
Therefore, both parties are merchants and will be held to the standard for merchants in this transaction.
??????
WRITING REQUIREMENT
When the contract is for the sale of goods at a value greater than $500, a writing is required signed by the party to be enforced. If the parties are merchants, a written sales contract by one party will bind both parties.
Here, the contract is for goods greater than $500 because it is for 100,000 widgets at $5 per piece. The written memorandum by one party will suffice, because both parties are merchants.
Therefore, a writing is required and this requirement has been met by the Feb 2 memorandum.
OFFER
An offer is a manifestation of present intent to enter into a bargain which is specific enough that a reasonable observer would assume that assent would form a bargain. Under the UCC, [it] will be sufficiently detailed if the quantity is provided. Other terms can be completed via Gap Fillers.
Here, the communication on Feb 1 contained the required detail for an offer because it contained the quantity 100,000 widgets. In addition, other terms were provided such as the parties, the price and time for performance.
Therefore a valid offer was made in the telephone call of February 1.
ACCEPTANCE
An acceptance is an unequivocal communication that the parties have present intent to be bound to the bargain. Under the UCC, if not specifically required in the offer, an acceptance can be made in any reasonable manner including the shipment of goods and within a reasonable time.
????????????
Here, the manufacturer verbally communicated his acceptance because he said "It's a deal". The terms of the contract would be those stated on the phone call and agreed to by both parties.
ADDITIONAL TERMS
Under the UCC, when both parties are merchants a contract can be modified without additional consideration. Additional terms will become part of the contract unless the receiving party objects within a reasonable time of notification and the terms do not materially change the agreement.
Here, the written memorandum on Feb 2, contained two additional terms. The first was related to the misquoted price of $6 as compared to $5, which was agreed to by the parties, and the addition of an arbitration clause. As both of these would materially change the terms of the agreement, they would not become part of the contract unless accepted by the manufacturer. As it relates to the use of arbitration, the court may view industry standards in determining what was agreed to.
The written formal memorandum if intended to be a full integration of the agreement will be the only evidence allowed under the PAROL EVIDENCE RULE. The parties may request that evidence as to the price be considered during their breach of contract claim. Since the use of $6 versus the agreed to price of $5 was a misstatement by Wholesaler, the court would likely make an exception to the Parol Evidence Rule based on mistake.
BREACH
A breach of contract occurs when a party fails to perform a duty that has become due under the contract.
Here, the manufacturer had a duty to deliver 100,000 widgets on February 8. On February 8, they breached that duty because they refused to deliver the widgets to the wholesaler.
?????
Therefore, Manufacturer has a material breach of contract, because they have failed to provide the benefit of the bargain to Wholesaler.
DEFENSES - UNCONSCIONABILITY
The manufacture may try to argue that the contract is unconscionable because the contract price is significantly below the market price. However, this defense is likely to fail because the price was reasonable at the time the contract was created and both parties assume a risk that market conditions will change and be unfavorable to them.
WHO PREVAILS
The Wholesaler is likely to prevail in a breach of contract claim because there was a valid contract in place and Manufacturer materially breached that contract.
REMEDIES
Under contract law, a non-breaching party has rights to expectation damages, reliance damages, and legal restitution. Expectation damages are designed to make the non- breaching party whole and legal restitution is available to prevent unjust enrichment.
Here, Wholesaler will seek damages associated with lost profits. Relying on the contract, he entered into contracts to resell the widgets for $15 dollars apiece after purchasing them for $5 per piece. He will seek to get the $10 per piece difference that he expected in profit. He will also try to recover the difference between contract cost and what he will have to pay to obtain at current market price. In this case, $25 market versus the $5 contract price.
He may also seek to recover the incidental damages, which are the costs he incurred against the contract. This could include such items as processing the orders with resellers, rented warehouse in preparation of the order and the like.
The wholesaler may also request specific performance under legal restitution which would require the manufacturer to provide the widgets as contracted. This would
???????
prevent the manufacturer from being unjustly enriched by reselling the widgets at $25 versus the $5 he is currently obligated to sell them for.


?California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2014
<br><br>
October 2014 ESSAY QUESTIONS<br>
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all 4 questions.
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines that are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?
?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/ Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 845 South Figueroa Street . Los Angeles, CA 90017-2515 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
OCTOBER 2014
CALIFORNIA FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the four essay questions from the October 2014 California First- Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers were assigned high grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were produced as submitted by the applicant, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. They are reproduced here with the consent of the authors.
??Question 1.
2. 3.
4.
Number
Subject 
Contracts
Torts 
Criminal Law
Contracts
??
QUESTION 1
Zena placed an advertisement in a local newspaper: "Wanted: Someone to clean my four-bedroom, four-bath house (2500 square feet) once a week for the next month; pay $35 per hour. No interview or references necessary. The first to apply will be accepted." She included her phone number.
Carl called her the next day and said, "I accept on the terms you have offered." Zena said, "You should know there was a mistake in the advertisement. The pay will be the same, but my house is actually 3000 square feet."
Carl said, "Let me think a moment."
Zena replied, "I have a call on another line, and I'll call you right back." When she called Carl two minutes later, Carl said, "I agree to clean for you on the terms you described. An extra 500 square feet does not matter to me."
Zena told Carl, "I'm sorry, but I've changed my mind and I think I'll do my own cleaning." Carl sues Zena for breach of contract.
Is Zena liable to Carl? Discuss.

QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER A
Is Zena liable for Carl? Zena (Z) v. Carl (C)
Contract
For a contract to be valid there must be an offer, acceptance, consideration, and no formation defenses.
Governing Law
The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) governs contracts that are for the sale of goods.
Service contracts are covered under common law, not the UCC. Here the contract is for a cleaning service and therefore this contract is governed by common law.
Offer
An offer is an objective present contractual intent communicated to the offeree with clear and definite terms.
Under common law the terms required for a contract are quantity, time for performance, identification of the parties, price and subject matter.
Advertisement
An advertisement is generally not considered an offer. However if the advertisement has clear and definite terms such that the advertisement may meet the requirements for an offer, some courts will allow for an advertisement to be considered an offer.
When Z placed an ad in the paper her terms were: quantity - my house
time for performance - Once a week for a month parties - first to apply

price - $35 per hour subject matter - cleaning
Because Z's advertisement in the paper has clear and definite terms her advertisement would likely be viewed as an offer.
Acceptance
Assent to the terms of the offer.
When C stated that, "I accept on the terms you have offered" C assented to the terms and showed an outward manifestation to be bound by the contract.
Z may argue that because her advertisement stated, "The first to apply will be accepted" and C stated that he accepted, C did not properly accept the contract. However a reasonable person would look at the conduct and what was said and likely find that acceptance was appropriate.
Modes of Acceptance (Mailbox Rule)
The offeror is the "master of the offer" and may specify a specific mode of acceptance. If the offeror does not, acceptance is done by a reasonable method given the method of the offer. Additionally, an acceptance is effective upon dispatch and a rejection is effective upon receipt.
Z included her phone number in the advertisement. This shows Z's intent that reasonable acceptance may be done by phone. C called Z the day after the advertisement was placed.
Timely Response
It is reasonable to assume that the following day after an advertisement goes into the paper when C called, that the acceptance is reasonably timely.

Mirror Image Rule
Under common law, an acceptance had to be a mirror image of the offer (additional or different terms would likely be a counteroffer or if asked properly an inquiry).
Consideration
Consideration is a bargained-for exchange/legal detriment.
Z was not bound to pay C for cleaning the house; the $35 per hour is a bargained-for exchange and a legal detriment. C was not previously bound or had a preexisting duty to clean Z's house. There is valid consideration for both parties.
Contract Formed
As discussed supra, there was a valid offer, acceptance and consideration. Absent a formation defense, a contract has been formed.
Formation Defense, No offer
Z will argue that the advertisement was not an offer. However for the reasons discussed supra, she will not win on this argument.
Formation Defense, Mistake
If there is a mutual mistake that goes to the heart of the bargain, the contract may be rescinded by the harmed party.
In the facts given there is no mutual mistake as a slight increase in the square footage of the home is not likely significant.
Unilateral Mistake
When there is a unilateral mistake to a contract, the contract may be unenforceable if it is unconscionable, or the non-mistaken party knew of or should have known of the mistake.

Z will state that she made a mistake in the offer and therefore she should be let out of the contract. However the contract on its face is not unconscionable, nor could C have known of the mistake.
Z will not prevail on this argument.
Statute of Frauds
Contracts for the sale of goods, in consideration of marriage, surety, sale of real property, and contracts that cannot be completed within a year are required to be in writing. Here there are no facts to support the statute of frauds is an issue as the contract is for a month's time.
Modification
A contract may be modified under common law so long as there is additional consideration and both parties assent to the modification.
When Z stated her house was actually 3000 sq feet and the pay was the same, Z attempted to modify the contract.
Additional Consideration for Modification
Consideration defined supra.
Because there was additional cleaning to be done 500 sq feet C would have more cleaning to do. Additional work would be legal consideration. C is being paid by the hour ($35). Because cleaning additional areas would take longer, C would be paid more.
Therefore this modification would have consideration.

Assent to Modification
When Z told C that she wanted to modify the contract, C said, "Let me think a moment". Let me think is not an outward appearance to agree to the modification and therefore C is not bound to the modification at this point.
When Z called C back C stated, "I agree to clean for you on the terms you described. An extra 500 sq ft does not matter to me." C assented to the modification and the modification therefore became valid.
Timeliness and Mode of Acceptance of Modification Defined supra.
Z stated she had another call and would call C right back. Upon calling C right back, C accepted the modification. Therefore the mode and timeliness of the acceptance of the modification were valid.
The modification of the contract is valid for the reasons discussed supra.
Revocation of an Offer
An offer may be terminated by communicating to the offeree prior to acceptance.
Z will argue that she terminated the offer when she stated she changed her mind and would do her own cleaning. Because the offer had already been accepted (discussed supra) Z cannot terminate the offer.
Breach
A breach occurs when one side to a contract does not perform. A breach may be major (goes to the heart of the contract) or may be minor.

Anticipatory Repudiation
When a party to a contract states clearly (through words or actions) they will not perform under the contract, the other party may treat the repudiation as a breach.
When Z stated she changed her mind, Z effectively said she was not going to perform under the contract. Because cleaning the house was the heart of the contract, this would be seen as a major breach.
C would be excused from his promise to clean.
Good Faith
A party to a contract may not make performance impossible and enforce the contract. Therefore Z does not have a claim of breach.
Expectation Damages
A party to a contract is entitled to the benefit he would have received had the contract been performed.
Here C would be entitled to $35 times the number of hours it would have taken to clean the house (as the modified contract stated) minus any expenses he would have had in cleaning the house.
Call 1. Is Zena liable to Carl?
For the reasons discussed supra, yes Zena is liable.

Carl v Zena
Governing Law
QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER B
??The Common Law governs contracts for services, as the Uniform Commercial Code governs contracts made for the sale of moveable goods.
The facts state the contract is for house cleaning, a type of service.
Thus the Common Law will be the governing law.
First Offer
An offer is a present outward manifestation of contractual intent, with clear and definite terms, communicated to the offeree.
Advertisement
According to Majority Rule an advertisement is merely a proposal for offers.
Minority Rule states if the Advertisement contains clear and definite terms could be an offer.
Here the facts indicate that Zena places an advertisement in a local newspaper for house cleaning services, showing a manifestation of present contractual intent, as she described the service needed.
The advertisement also included the following terms: Quantity: 1
??
Time of performance: Once a week/next month Identity of parties: Zena and 1st to apply
Price: $35 per hour
Subject matter: 4 bedroom house (2500 sq ft)
Since the terms are clear and definite, and stated with particularity they become part of the offer.
Also, because Zena placed her phone number in the advertisement, and received a call from Carl, it was communicated to the offeree.
Because all the terms are clear and definite if the courts follow the minority rule they will construe this advertisement to be an offer.
If the courts decide it is merely an invitation for offers, and follow the Majority rule, it will not be a valid offer.
Reasonable Person - Objective Theory of Contracts
According to the objective theory of contracts, the most reasonable person would view Zena's offer in the newspaper as an offer, because all the terms are clearly stated, and it states the first person to apply will be accepted. Also a reasonable person would see Zena's phone number, not just merely an ad, and would believe that she could be contacted immediately to accept the cleaning service.
Acceptance #1
An acceptance is an unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Here, Carl calls Zena the next day, stating, "I accept on the terms you have offered," showing an unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer, made using her telephone
??
number, a call assenting to the "master of the offer," to return an acceptance in phone call. If the courts find there was a valid offer, then Carl's acceptance will also be valid.
Zena will argue that because she received the phone call from Carl, their conversation also included that she made a mistake in the advertisement which she stated before the conversation was over.
As will be discussed below, if the courts decide that Zena does have a valid point then the offer will be terminated; if not, then Carl will have made a valid acceptance.
Termination - Oral Conversation.
Because an oral conversation has taken place between Carl and Zena, and Zena made a statement of making a mistake in her advertisement, at the end of the conversation, Carl states "Let me think about it," we can infer that there was no decision made.
Thus the oral conversation terminates the offer, since no decisions were made.
Exception Unilateral
A unilateral contract cannot be terminated once performance has begun. Here, because Carl and Zena have not made a decision, or agreed upon one, and no performance has begun the offer is still terminated at the end of their conversation.
OFFER #2
Offer defined supra.
During Carl and Zena's phone conversation, Zena proposed a mistake in her first offer to Carl. She stated that the pay will be the same, but my house is actually 3,000 square feet, in which implies different terms, thus creating a second offer to Carl.
?????
Acceptance #2
Because Zena hung up the phone, and called Carl two minutes later, Carl then stated an unequivocal assent to the terms of her second offer.
Thus a valid acceptance. Revocation
An offeror may revoke their offer anytime prior to a timely acceptance. Revocation is effective upon receipt.
Here, the facts indicate after Carl accepts Zena's offer, Zena then tells Carl, "I'm sorry, but I've changed my mind," indicating a revocation of her offer to Carl.
Since Zena's revocation was not prior to the acceptance by Carl, it will not be effective. Thus not a valid revocation.
Meeting of the Minds/Mistake
The courts will view the contract by both Zena and Carl to be mutual if they show that they knew of the contract, and a reasonable person would believe that they were entering this contract with no doubts.
Zena will argue that there was no meeting of the minds because she made a mistake in her advertisement, and when Carl called they hung up, and two minutes later before Zena could respond, Carl is stating that he accepts the terms. This is not giving her enough time to respond or react to the second offer; he just came out and said I agree to your terms.
???
Thus if the courts side with Zena and there was no meeting of the minds then there will be no contract, if they side with Carl a contract has been formed.
MISTAKE - UNILATERAL
Usually the courts will side with the non-mistaken party and go by what they state was in the contract at the beginning of formation.
Carl will argue that Zena made a mistake in her advertisement, clearing it up with him later, and he still accepted her new terms.
Thus the court will side with Carl and use the terms of the contract that were formed during formation.
Consideration
Consideration is a bargain for exchange of a legal detriment.
Here, Zena is bargaining for her house to be cleaned, and Carl is receiving $35 per hour to clean her home.
Thus a bargain for exchange has been made. Thus a valid contract exists.
Defenses to Formation Mistake - Unilateral
As discussed above, Zena created a unilateral mistake, but fixed the mistake with Carl after the advertisement was posted.
????
Thus not a valid defense.
STATUTE OF FRAUDS
Statute of frauds requires some contracts to be in writing: Marriage, debt of another, contracts that cannot be performed within one year, $500.00 or more, and interest in land.
Because this contract is for house cleaning services it does not fall within the statute of frauds.
Thus not a valid defense. BREACH
Major Breach - Here because Carl did not receive his benefit of the bargain, Zena has created a major breach of contract.
Remedies
Reformation
Due to the mistake that Zena made in her advertisement, which was later cleared up, Carl may ask the courts to reform the contract to what both parties intended it to be at the time of formation.
Rescission
Due to Zena's unilateral mistake she may ask the court to rescind the contract, and apply the agreed upon terms.
??????
QUESTION 2
Homer and Wanda are husband and wife. The furnace in their home stopped working. Wanda wanted to call a licensed repair person, but Homer insisted on attempting to fix it himself, despite having no knowledge of how the furnace worked.
After working on the furnace for some time, Homer informed Wanda that he had fixed it. Wanda and Homer then went out to dinner. When they arrived home, they found that it had been destroyed by fire. They were informed by a firefighter at the scene that the fire appeared to have originated in the furnace. When Wanda started yelling at Homer for "burning the house down," Homer slapped her to calm her down.
Wanda sued Homer for negligence and battery. At a jury trial, she presented evidence proving the facts stated above. At the close of evidence, Homer moved for a directed verdict on the following grounds:
1. Spouses cannot sue each other in tort;
2. Wanda failed to present sufficient evidence to support a finding that Homer was negligent; and
3. Homer is not subject to liability for slapping Wanda because his intent was to calm her down, not to cause her any harm.
How is the judge likely to rule on Homer's motion for directed verdict? Discuss.

QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER A
WILL HOMER'S MOTION FOR DIRECTED VERDICT SUCCEED?
IDENTIFICATION OF THE PARTIES: Homer is the defendant; Wanda is the plaintiff.
STANDING TO SUE:
I. CAN SPOUSES SUE EACH OTHER IN TORT?
According to common law, spousal suits against each other were not generally allowed. However, the current trend is to allow suits between spouses especially when intentional torts are involved. Thus, whether Wanda can sue Homer would essentially be a jurisdictional issue and a matter of law which the judge would determine. If the judge rules that no, spouses cannot sue in tort, Homer's liability will terminate and the directed verdict will be granted. However, this is unlikely considering the current trends allowing suits between spouses. Here, we will assume that spouses are allowed to sue each other in tort of both intentional tort and negligence.
II. IS HOMER NEGLIGENT?
Here, the question of negligence would relate to the burning of the house and whether Homer's actions were sufficiently negligent in causing the burning. Negligence requires the finding of a duty imposed upon the Plaintiff (Homer), a breach of that duty, causation of the injury and an actual injury.
1. DID HOMER HAVE A DUTY?
Duties are usually evaluated according to a reasonable person standard unless a special relationship exists between the parties. The reasonable duty of care is

generally the duty to not harm another person and to act in a reasonable manner designed not to place others in unreasonable harm.
IS THERE A SPECIAL DUTY VIA RELATIONSHIP?
Here, the parties are husband and wife. A duty of care between husband and wife, as immediate family, is higher than the duty imposed regarding an average unrelated citizen. The duty to protect from harm is greater because of the relationship between Homer and Wanda. Because the duty to not harm Wanda is greater than the reasonable person standard a duty can be assignable to Homer.
2. DID HOMER BREACH THAT DUTY?
A breach of duty requires actions be committed by the Plaintiff (Homer) that place others in unreasonable danger or heightened risk. Breach can be established via statute (negligence per se) where a violation of civil or criminal statute imposes automatic fault (which then, if the violation is a civil statute, constitutes a rebuttable presumption by the Plaintiff). Here, there is no negligence per se because there is no mention of a statute being violated. Breach can also be established through clear explicit facts and/or the definable overt actions of the Plaintiff (Homer). However, the facts here are murky. Thus, a third method of determining breach must be used--the method of res ipsa loquitor.
Res ipsa loquitor allows an inference of breach when clear facts supporting breach do not exist. Res ipsa requires that the defendant be in clear control of the instrumentality that caused the injury, that the injury would not have occurred without some sort of negligence by the defendant, that no possible superseding acts occur that would remove the defendant from the chain of control over the instrumentality, and that the plaintiff (Wanda) not have participated in their own injury.

RES IPSA LOQUITOR AS VEHICLE FOR FINDING BREACH OF DUTY
a. DID HOMER HAVE CLEAR CONTROL OVER THE FURNACE?
Here, the instrumentality that caused the injury (the destruction of the property, the "house") appears to be the "furnace in their home" that had "stopped working". It states that Homer "insist[ed] on attempting to fix it himself" instead of "call[ing] a licensed repair person". There is no mention of any other person or thing interacting with the furnace between the time Homer "attempt[ed] to fix it himself" and the "burning" of the house. This means Homer was ostensibly the last person to interact with the furnace and a reasonable person could conclude that Homer had a clear control over the physical object of the "furnace" which ostensibly caused the injury, "burning". This element is most likely met on its face since the "furnace" was within the purview of the "home" which would be interpreted to be under Homer's control (dominion).
b. WOULD THE INJURY HAVE OCCURRED WITHOUT SOME SORT OF NEGLIGENCE BY THE DEFENDANT?
This is a more sticky issue than the clear control issue, supra, which seems to be a straight physical-control-over-the-object question. This element focuses more on the interaction the defendant had on the object in question.
On first glance, it seems that since Homer "having no knowledge of how the furnace worked" but yet "attempting to fix it himself" would infer that his lack of experience likely caused improper repair on the furnace which then, according to the firefighter at the scene, seemed to be the cause of the fire that "appeared to have originated in the furnace". It appears on its face that Homer's repair led to the fire. However, could the furnace have posed a fire risk prior to Homer's repair efforts? Perhaps. Did Homer's repair in fact actually place the furnace in a condition that would cause a fire risk when his attempt at repair would not? This is

unknown. The facts state that "the furnace in their home stopped working" but it doesn't state what stopped working or why. There is also no mention of a defect to the furnace prior to repair that would pose a fire risk.
Surface review would appear to assign Homer's actions as a direct cause of the fire. But, the fact that a firefighter (although ostensibly an expert in the field of fighting fires) making the statement that the fire "appeared" to have "originated in the furnace" is not a direct statement of "the furnace started the fire because it had been repaired incorrectly". This is probably a matter for an expert witness to determine at trial. If Homer's actions did not cause the fire because the furnace was already damaged and at a fire risk and Homer's "repairs" did not place that furnace in a higher state of unreasonable unsafety then the injury of "the burning of the house" may not be attributable to Homer's act of trying to fix the furnace and negate this element of res ipsa loquitor resulting in no negligence. However, if this element is met the other elements of negligence must also be met to find liability on the part of Homer.
c. WERE ANY ACTS OR EVENTS INTERVENING OR SUPERSEDING CAUSES OF THE INJURY THAT WOULD RELEASE DEFENDANT FROM LIABILITY?
Intervening and superseding acts are those outside occurences separate from the defendant's actions that may break the chain of causation within the res ipsa loquitor analysis. Intervening acts are those that occur that are foreseeable consequences of defendant's acts and do not relieve defendant of liability. Superseding acts are those that are outside the realm of foreseeability and would be those so out of the ordinary that they would relieve the defendant of liability. Intentional torts and criminal acts are considered superseding.

Here, we don't know what acts may or may have occurred between the "attempt[ed]...fix" by Homer and the "home...destroyed by fire" that may or may not have "originated in the furnace". As discussed above, the exact cause of the fire is only an assumption at this point, not a definitive statement of fact. Further analysis outside the fact pattern will be needed.
It is to be noted that the acts of the fire department in attempting to stop the fire may have contributed to the "destruction" of the home. However, acts done during attempts to rescue are foreseeable results of a "fire" by those public servants tasked with protecting the public, "firefighters". Even if actions by the fire department are found to be negligent that will not release Homer from any potential liability since intervening acts of negligence are always considered foreseeable.
d. DID PLAINTIFF CONTRIBUTE TO THEIR OWN INJURY?
It is unlikely Wanda will be considered to have contributed to her own injury, the "destruction" of the "house" by "fire". However, she did want to call a "licensed repair person" but was persuaded to let Homer fix the furnace instead despite the fact that she (likely) knew Homer had "no knowledge of how the furnace worked". Was this enough to place some responsibility of "destruction" of the "home" by "fire" on Wanda? Perhaps. Again, additional facts will be needed.
Assuming the elements of res ipsa loquitor are met, there will be a finding of breach on the part of Homer.
3. WAS THE BREACH THE CAUSE OF THE INJURY?
Again, as discussed above in the res ipsa loquitor section, whether Homer's breach in trying to "fix it [the furnace] himself, despite having no knowledge of how the furnace worked" caused the injury of "destruction of the house by fire" is uncertain. If breach is found via res ipsa loquitor then this element of causation will

also be met since the question posed here will be answered in the analysis of res ipsa loquitor.
4. WAS THERE AN INJURY?
An injury here would be the destruction of the "house" by "fire" which would constitute property damage and thus qualify as "injury" for negligence. Pure economic damages are not recoverable but personal injury and property damages do qualify as "injury" for the purposes of negligence.
DEFENSES TO BREACH
Homer may have several defenses to breach that would negate his liability and thus allow a directed verdict. The only two potential defenses are comparative negligence and assumption of risk. Comparative negligence jurisdictions allow a complete bar to plaintiff recovery if that plaintiff contributed in any manner to their own injury. As above, assignment of responsibility to Wanda will be necessary to trigger comparative negligence and bar her from recovery. A bar to recovery would allow a directed verdict for Homer regarding the negligence claim. Contributory negligence, while a defense more often available in a majority of jurisdictions, assigns risk to plaintiffs based on their percentage of fault and reduces their recovery accordingly. Here, only a finding of fault in excess of 50% on Wanda's behalf (in Pure Comparative Negligence jurisdictions) or 50% or higher (Modified Comparative Negligence jurisdictions) would bar her from complete recovery. Finding Wanda at fault in excess of 50% or 50% or higher is unlikely and thus comparative negligence in both its forms would only serve to reduce damages which would then prohibit Homer from receiving his directed verdict. Assumption of the risk is a defense that states a plaintiff is barred from recovery if they knew of the risk and voluntarily assumed it. Here, there is no clear assumption of the risk of "destruction of the home by fire" by Wanda and thus she did not voluntarily assume it. This is not a defense.

III. DID HOMER COMMIT A BATTERY AGAINST WANDA?
Battery is the intentional volitional act of the defendant against the plaintiff causing an offensive or harmful touching of the plaintiff's body or person (a connected object suffices). The reasonable person standard applies when evaluating what is "harmful" or "offensive" contact.
Here, the defendant "Homer" intentionally and volitionally "slapped [the plaintiff] [[Wanda] to calm her down" which would be considered a harmful and offensive touching of the body of "Wanda" when evaluated by a reasonable person. There is a battery because Homer intended to touch her and caused a harmful and offensive touching.
DEFENSES TO BATTERY
Homer poses a defense to battery that his intent was "to calm Wanda down" and not "cause her alarm". However, the reason behind the battery is not relevant, only the intent to touch and a resulting harmful or offensive contact is needed to establish battery. There is no defense to battery.
CONCLUSION: There is likely standing for the parties to sue; negligence on the part of Homer has not been clearly established with the facts at hand; Homer did commit a battery. There will be no directed verdict in favor of Homer.

QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER B
WANDA v. HOMER SPOUSAL IMMUNITY?
SPOUSAL IMMUNITY is where a husband and wife cannot sue each other. This theory is no longer observed in most modern jurisdictions, but is the common law.
The facts show that Wanda sued her husband. In common law a husband and wife could not sue each other. Modernly, this is no longer observed and spouses can, and do, sue each other.
If a common law jurisdiction, Wanda could not sue Homer.
NEGLIGENCE?
NEGLIGENCE is found where there is a DUTY owed, a STANDARD OF CARE to be followed, a BREACH of the DUTY, the BREACH is the ACTUAL CAUSE of plaintiff's injury, the PROXIMATE CAUSE of plaintiff's injury, and DAMAGES are suffered by plaintiff.
DUTY?
DUTY is the responsibility to not cause unreasonable risk of harm to others.
The facts show that Homer wanted to repair the furnace in their house. He had a duty to not unreasonably cause risk of harm to others in the house by doing so.
Homer owed a duty.

STANDARD OF CARE?
STANDARD OF CARE is the care that must be observed to ensure that defendant's actions are reasonable.
Homer's standard of care owed was to ensure that the furnace was repaired in a safe manner, so as not to burn the house down, or cause harm to his house or his wife.
Homer owed a standard of care to Wanda.
BREACH OF DUTY?
BREACH OF DUTY is failure to perform one's duty, supra.
The facts show that Homer did not know how to repair a furnace. He breached his duty because he wanted to fix it himself, despite having no knowledge of how to do so. This was a breach because he did not know how to fix a furnace.
Homer breached his duty.
RES IPSA LOQUITUR?
RES IPSA LOQUITUR finds that plaintiff has suffered an injury that is not normally found in the absence of negligence, plaintiff was not contributorily negligent, defendant had complete control of the item that caused the injury, and defendant in a better position to explain what happened.
After Homer fixed the furnace Homer and Wanda left the house and went out to dinner. Because nobody was home, the exact cause of the fire could not be determined without an expert's inspection of the premises. However, normally a

house does not burn down right after a furnace has been worked on. Because the furnace work was done by someone who did not know how to work on furnaces, there is an appearance of negligence. Wanda was not contributorily negligent toward the house burning down because she did not work on the furnace. Homer had complete control of the furnace because he worked on it prior to the house burning down. Homer was in a better position to explain what caused the fire to start because he worked on the furnace.
Absent proof of actual breach of duty, supra, Wanda could rely on res ipsa loquitur. ACTUAL CAUSE?
ACTUAL CAUSE is the event that ignites events that causes plaintiff's injury and is satisfied by the but-for or substantial factor test.
The facts show that after working for some time on the furnace, Homer believed that he had fixed it. This was the actual cause that ignited the event that burned their house down. But for Homer working on the furnace, the house would not have burnt down.
Homer was the actual cause of the injury. PROXIMATE CAUSE?
PROXIMATE CAUSE is the foreseeable result of the actual cause, supra, unbroken by independent or superseding intervening events.
The facts show that after Homer worked on the furnace, the house burnt down. This was a foreseeable event of someone doing repairs on a furnace by someone who does not know how to work on a furnace. There were not intervening events because the firefighter informed them that the fire originated in the furnace.

Homer was the proximate cause of the injury.
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE?
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE is where plaintiff contributes to her own injury and is a complete bar to recovery. This theory has been abolished in most jurisdictions, but is still the common law theory.
The facts show that Wanda wanted to call a licensed repair person but let Homer work on the furnace himself. Wanda contributed to her own injury because she should have insisted that the professional furnace repair person be there. She was responsible for the house burning down because she didn't insist on a professional doing the repair.
Absent a valid defense, Wanda was contributorily negligent.
LAST CLEAR CHANCE?
LAST CLEAR CHANCE is a valid defense to contributory negligence supra, where plaintiff is found contributorily negligent but defendant had the last clear chance to avoid the injury.
The facts show that Wanda was contributorily negligent, supra. However, Homer had the last clear chance to avoid the injury by not working on the furnace when he had no knowledge on how to do so. Had he waited until a professional could work on the furnace, the house would not have burnt down.
Homer had the last clear chance to avoid the injury and Wanda's recovery is not barred.

COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE?
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE is found where defendant is liable for the injury, plaintiff contributed to her own injury, and can recover damages in an amount apportioned to defendant's liability.
The facts show that Homer was liable for the injury because he worked on the furnace and the house burnt down. Wanda contributed to her own injury because she did not insist on a professional repairing the furnace. If the jurisdiction is a comparative negligence jurisdiction, she could recover damages in an amount apportioned to Homer's negligence in burning down their house.
There was comparative negligence. STRICT LIABILITY?
STRICT LIABILITY is liability without fault where an abnormally or dangerous activity is found.
The facts show that Homer had no knowledge of how to work on a furnace. Because furnaces are dangerous pieces of equipment subject to exploding, this could be classified as an abnormally dangerous activity. Homer did not have the skill to work in this manner, and the fact that the house burnt down with the fire originating at the furnace shows that there was a dangerous element to this repair.
Homer may be strictly liable.

DAMAGES?
DAMAGES are required if plaintiff is to recover for negligence.
Wanda's house was burned down; therefore she suffered an injury. She could recover general damages for pain and suffering and special damages for the cost of the house that burnt down.
Wanda can recover damages. BATTERY?
BATTERY is the intentional, harmful, offensive touching of another without consent or privilege.
The facts show that Homer slapped Wanda when she yelled at him for burning the house down. This was an intentional touching because he intended to slap her. It was a harmful touching because he did slap her. It was an offensive touching because slapping people is not acceptable adult behavior. Homer did not have Wanda's consent to slap her, nor did he have a privilege to slap his wife.
Homer argued that he was only trying to calm her down. However, this is offensive and harmful because it is not acceptable to slap people to calm them down.
Homer is liable for battery. DAMAGES?
DAMAGES, supra.

Wanda could recover general and special damages, supra. She could also recover punitive damages for Homer's wanton and willful battery.
1. Homer's motion for directed verdict for spousal immunity should be granted if a common law jurisdiction.
2. Homer's motion for directed verdict for negligence should be denied because Homer was negligent.
3. HomerisliableforslappingWandabecausehecommittedintentionalbattery.

QUESTION 3
Steve and Frank became acquainted at a correctional facility for mentally ill violent offenders. Steve was an inmate who had to take antipsychotic medication to prevent paranoia. Frank was employed as a kitchen helper. Once they discovered that they both wanted to be actors, they hatched a scheme to kidnap a famous actor, Art, upon Steve's release from the facility, and to show him their acting skills. They believed that, once Art saw how talented they were, he would help them get acting jobs. They would then release him.
When Steve was released, he stopped taking his antipsychotic medication. As a result, he went in and out of paranoia. On bad days, he developed a belief that Frank had supernatural powers and that he had to do what Frank said or Frank would kill him. While Frank knew Steve was mentally ill, he was not aware of the severity of his illness.
Steve and Frank located Art's house, kidnapped him and took him to a remote location. During the kidnapping, Steve believed that Art was going with them willingly to assist them in their acting careers. After they arrived at the location, and while Frank was out, Steve beat Art and took his wallet. In a panic, Steve stole a car and drove away at a high rate of speed.
A police officer followed Steve and tried to stop him. Steve, believing the kidnapping, battery, and robbery had been discovered, attempted to escape by driving greatly in excess of the speed limit. During the high speed chase, the officer's car spun out of control and he died in the accident.
1. What charges, if any, can reasonably be brought against Frank for the beating of Art and the taking of his wallet? Discuss.
2. What charges, if any, can reasonably be brought against Frank for the death of the police officer? Discuss.
3. What defenses, if any, can Steve reasonably raise against a charge of kidnapping Art? Discuss.

QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER A
State v. Frank for Battery and Robbery of Art
Accomplice Liability
At common law, all parties to a crime were labeled accessory before the fact, accessory after the fact, a primary or secondary accomplice. Here, both Steve and Frank are primary accomplices as they are effectuating the kidnapping. As such, they will be liable for all foreseeable crimes that occur during the perpetration of the kidnapping of Art.
Art would argue that the he did not participate in the battery or robbery of Art as he had left the location where Steve beat Art and he had only agreed to a kidnapping. This argument would fail because Frank knew Steve was mentally ill and was not in full control of his capacities. Frank left Steve alone with Art even though he wasn't sure of the extent of Frank's mental illness. The kidnapping was using force and it would be foreseeable that Steve would continue to use force to detain Art.
Frank would argue it wasn't foreseeable that physical force would be used after the kidnapping had occurred and they were sitting in a remote location. His intent was to get discovered as an actor not an intent on his part to steal Art's wallet.
Frank would lose as the continuation of kidnapping and the battery and larceny of the wallet that continued within the crime were foreseeable.
Conspiracy
At common law, conspiracy is an agreement between two or more people to commit an illegal act. Modernly, most jurisdictions require an overt act.

Steve and Frank hatched a scheme to kidnap an actor. The hatching is the agreement for the illegal purpose of kidnapping. In some states, simply agreeing to kidnap Art is the act needed, while in others the overt act was going to Art's house and actually kidnapping him. Under either view this crime is complete because they kidnapped Art from his home and took him to a remote location.
Under the Pinkerton Rule, once the conspiracy is formed, coconspirators are liable for all the actions of all their partners in furtherance of the conspiracy. Frank would argue that the beating and theft of the wallet were not in furtherance of the conspiracy, that the conspiracy was only kidnapping. However, the crime of kidnapping was continuing, they had not let Art free nor had Frank tried to withdraw so he is liable for all the criminal acts of Steve.
State v. Frank death of police officer Accomplice liability supra Conspiracy supra
Robbery
Is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the tangible personal property of another (trespassory taking is wrongful) with the intent to steal (permanently deprive) plus the use of force or threat of force. Here, Frank's co-conspirator beat (use of force) Art and took his wallet (tangible personal property) and left the remote location (carrying away).
Homicide
Is the death of a human being by defendant's acts.

Actual Cause
Requires but for the defendant's wrongful act, the officer would not have died. Here, had Frank not participated in this criminal venture with Steve, the police officer wouldn't have chased a scared Steve and died.
Proximate Cause
It is foreseeable that a police officer would die when engaged in a high speed chase.
Murder
Murder is a homicide committed with Malice.
Malice can be proven in one of four ways, intent to kill, intent to cause serious bodily injury, wanton & willful conduct and the felony murder rule.
Here, Steve Frank's liability would rest on the felony murder rule if the police officer died within the commission of an inherently dangerous felony. There is a split of jurisdictions on an inherently dangerous felony definition; some define it as the manner in which the felony is carried out and some define it by statute. Burglary, arson, robbery, rape and kidnapping all qualify as felony murders. Frank would argue that this death would not fall within the felony murder rule because the officer's death occurred after Steve had left his place of apparent safety and abandoned the kidnapping. This argument would fail because Steve was speeding away from the police thinking that the kidnapping, robbery and battery had been discovered. Steve was still in the commission of his criminal acts, which Frank shared accomplice liability for.
If the court found that the Felony murder rule did not apply, then the death of the officer would be determined as a 2nd degree murder.

There are no defenses available to Frank.
Defenses of Steve
Steve would assert an insanity defense. Under the M'Naghten rule, a person is not liable for his criminal acts if he cannot understand either the nature or character of his acts.
The "right or wrong" test requires that the defendant due to mental disease or defect cannot cognitively realize that what he is doing is wrong. If an "irresistible impulse" jurisdiction the defendant would argue that he didn't have the volitional, physical capacity to control his behavior. The model penal code standard uses both of those tests combined. Finally, in the federal courts and one state, Steve could assert the "Durham" test which states that if the act is a product of his mental disease, he is not guilty by reason of insanity. Steve's history of mental illness in a correctional facility, the medications he takes for the illness, the effect of paranoia in the majority jurisdiction of M'Naghten would mean Steve's mental disease of paranoia made it impossible for him to know what he was doing was wrong.

State v. Frank
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER B
?Solicitation
Encouraging another to commit a crime with the intent they do it.
Here the facts do not clearly show who instigated the idea to kidnap Art. In any case this crime would merge, with Conspiracy and the target crime.
Conspiracy
Two or more persons agreeing to commit a crime. Modernly it requires an act in
furtherance of the crime.
Here, Frank and Steve "hatched a scheme to kidnap ... Art." Kidnapping is a crime and they agreed to do it. They "located Art's house" - an act in furtherance of the kidnapping.
Frank is guilty of Conspiracy.
Pinkerton's rule - Accomplice liability
Under Pinkerton, all conspirators are responsible for all of the foreseeable crimes in
furtherance of the conspiracy.
Frank will be guilty of all foreseeable crimes committed by Steve during the kidnapping.
Battery
Unlawful force to another.
?????
Here, "Steve beat Art" during the kidnapping. Normally, battery of some sort occurs during and as part of a kidnapping and is a lesser included offense that merges with the kidnapping.
In this case, the battery was not incident to the kidnapping and may be charged separately.
Frank may be charged with battery as part of the kidnapping; however, if this battery was not a foreseeable part of the conspiracy, Frank will not be guilty of Frank beating Art.
Larceny
Trespassory taking and asportation of the property of another with the intent to
permanently deprive.
Here, Steve "took Art's wallet;" since it was during Art's kidnapping, it would have been from his person, thus a 'trespassory taking.' Steve 'drove away' with the wallet, satisfying asportation. There is nothing to suggest he meant to return it at any time, since he fled "in a panic."
There is a larceny by Steve.
Robbery
Larceny (supra) by force or intimidation.
Steve's taking Art's wallet after beating him suggests the wallet was taken by force. Steve committed Robbery.
As above, if these were the foreseeable consequences of the conspiracy, Frank will be charged with Robbery in the taking of Art's wallet.
?????
Frank will argue the Battery and Robbery were not foreseeable; however the State will point out that these are foreseeable crimes and do occur in many kidnappings.
Frank will be charged for all, including the death of the police officer. Murder
Homicide
One person causing the death of another.
Causation
Actual
But for Steve speeding away the officer wouldn't have died.
Proximate
It is foreseeable that an officer in pursuit at high speed could lose control of his
car and die.
We have homicide.
Malice
May be shown in various ways.
Intent to kill/commit great bodily harm Not evidenced in facts.
Felony Murder Rule (FMR)
Death during commission of an enumerated felony shows malice - Kidnapping (infra) is such a felony.
??????????
Wanton and Reckless Conduct
Driving at 'excessively high speeds' is wanton and reckless.
We have Malice.
Murder in the First Degree (M1)
May be shown in various ways, including
FMR
If death occurs during the enumerated felony - Kidnapping (infra) - M1 may be
charged.
Here, Steve was attempting to escape pursuit from the scene of the kidnapping. He had not reached a place of safety; thus the officer died as a part of the kidnapping.
M1 may be charged. If this fails:
Murder in the Second Degree (M2)
Death as a result of Wanton and Reckless disregard of life and safety may be
charged as M2, which falls under all Murder that is not M1.
Here Steve "attempted to escape driving greatly in excess of the speed limit." This shows Depraved Heart because such action is likely to harm or kill someone.
If the court does not find Murder, the death of the officer would be:
Voluntary Manslaughter (VM)
Death due to criminal negligence.
??????
Here in addition to the 'high speed,' Steve drove "in excess of the speed limit " - a statutory violation. Thus VM may be charged under Misdemeanor Manslaughter as well as Criminal Negligence.
Frank will be chargeable, as such flight and its consequences are the foreseeable result of the conspiracy (Pinkerton) (supra).
Kidnapping
Taking and moving another without Justification or Excuse.
Here the facts state that the kidnapping occurred as the result of the conspiratorial acts of Frank and Steve.
Defenses for Steve
Insanity
Steve will claim that he was not responsible for his actions.
M'Naughton
Steve will argue he could not understand what he was doing since "Steve believed
that Art was going with them willingly."
Steve's illness doesn't meet M'Naughton though because "he went in and out of
paranoia." Also, Steve knew what he had done since he "believed the kidnapping...had been discovered."
Irresistable Impulse
Steve's following Frank's direction may fall under this during a paranoid episode
but will also fail.
??????
Model Penal Code
As a blend of the above defenses, Steve's best defense is that due to his illness,
he didn't have the necessary intent at the time of the kidnapping.
These will all likely fail as, when he was aware and fleeing, he didn't abandon the crimes.
?
QUESTION 4
Doug, a developer, and Bill, a builder, entered into a contract. Under the contract, Bill was to build a building for Doug for $100,000, and was to receive a $10,000 "on-time bonus" if he were to complete construction by a specified date.
Bill, in turn, entered into a contract with Ellen, an electrical contractor. Under this contract, Ellen was to do the electrical work for the building for $15,000. At the time she entered into the contract, Ellen was not aware of Bill's on-time bonus, but learned about it before she was to begin the job.
In the midst of the job, after receiving $3,000 in progress payments, Ellen decided she could not profitably do the electrical work for $15,000 and quit. Bill looked diligently for an electrical contractor to complete the work at the lowest cost. The only electrical contractor Bill could locate was Roger. Roger demanded $20,000 to complete the work. Bill agreed and paid Roger $20,000 upon completion.
In spite of Bill's best efforts, and solely because Ellen had quit the job, Bill completed construction late and, as a result, did not receive the on-time bonus.
1. Is Ellen liable to Doug for any damages Doug may have incurred as a result of the late completion of the construction? Discuss.
2. Is Ellen liable to Bill for:
a. The loss of the on-time bonus? Discuss. b. For any other damages? Discuss.

QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER A
1. IS ELLEN LIABLE TO DOUG FOR ANY DAMAGES DOUG MAY HAVE INCURRED AS A RESULT OF THE LATE COMPLETION OF THE CONSTRUCTION?
DOUG V. ELLEN
U.C.C./COMMON LAW
The common law governs contracts for the sale of goods. A good is tangible property that is moveable and identifiable at the time and of the formation of a contract.
In this case, the subject matter is the construction of a building. This is not a good, but rather Doug is bargaining for Bill's service and Bill is bargaining for Ellen and Roger's service.
Therefore, common law rules will govern this case. FORMATION
An enforceable contract consists of a valid offer and a valid acceptance, together known as mutual assent, plus consideration, minus applicable defenses.
Facts state that a valid contract between Doug and Bill had been formed wherein Bill was to build a building for Doug for $100,000 and an additional on-time bonus of $10,000 if the building was completed on time. Doug is receiving the building in exchange for the money and Bill is receiving the money in exchange for the service.
Therefore, there is valid consideration and a valid contract has been formed.

CONDITIONS
An act or event not certain to occur, which if excused or satisfied, gives rise to or extinguishes a duty to perform under the terms of the contract.
Express Condition Precedent
In order to receive the $10,000 bonus, Bill must complete the project on time. Bill must fully satisfy the condition to receive this money.
Satisfaction of Condition
Bill failed to satisfy this condition due to the breach caused by Ellen. Substantial satisfaction is not adequate.
Excuse
Bill does not have a valid excuse. Doug does not owe Bill the bonus. FORMATION OF CONTRACT 2
Supra.
Facts state that Bill subsequently entered into a valid contract with Ellen. Ellen was to perform the electrical work as a subcontractor for Bill for the price of $15,000. Bill is receiving Ellen's services in exchange for the money. Ellen is receiving the money in exchange for her labor for Bill's project.
Therefore, there is a valid consideration and valid contract has been formed.

THIRD PARTY RIGHTS
A contract in which the parties, at the time of the agreement, specifically intend to benefit a third party.
Privity
Doug is not in privity with Ellen because he is not a party to the contract. However, the privity requirement has been abolished under Lawrence v. Fox.
Intended Beneficiary
Doug will argue that he is an intended beneficiary of the Bill/Ellen contract because the work that was to be performed was for him.
However, Ellen will argue that Doug was not an intended beneficiary because she did not enter into the contract in order to benefit Doug, but only to gain employment from Bill. Ellen could have entered into a contract to work as a subcontractor for Bill for any number of projects which Bill may have been working. Her agreement with Bill does not mean that Ellen had a specific intent to benefit the client for whom Bill was contracted.
Therefore, Doug is not an intended beneficiary.
Creditor/Donee Beneficiary
If for some reason Doug can prove to the court that he is an intended beneficiary, the argument will continue as follows.
If Doug is an intended beneficiary, he is a creditor beneficiary because he is owed something under the Doug/Bill contract. Bill and Ellen are not performing their services in order to confer a gift upon Doug, but are doing so in exchange for the money Doug will pay. However, as discussed supra Doug is not likely an intended beneficiary.

Vesting
Doug does not have rights.
Defenses None
Therefore, Doug will not be able to recover damages from Ellen for the late completion of the contract because he is not a party to the Bill/Ellen contract and is not an intended beneficiary.
Remedies/Damages
If Doug recovers at all, he will be able to recover from Bill for damages incurred due to Bill's failure to complete the project on time. Doug will be able to deduct his damages from the contract price. Bill will then be able to recover those damages from Ellen for her breach. See infra.
2. IS ELLEN LIABLE TO BILL FOR: THE LOSS OF THE ON-TIME BONUS? FOR ANY OTHER DAMAGES?
BILL V. ELLEN
FORMATION OF CONTRACT 2 Supra.
Facts state that Bill subsequently entered into a valid contract with Ellen. Ellen was to perform the electrical work as a subcontractor for Bill for the price of $15,000. Bill is receiving Ellen's services in exchange for the money. Ellen is receiving the money in exchange for her labor for Bill's project.

Therefore, there is a valid consideration and valid contract has been formed.
CONDITIONS
An act or event not certain to occur, which if excused or satisfied, gives rise to or extinguishes a duty to perform under the terms of the contract.
Constructive Condition Precedent
Generally, the longer performance must precede the shorter performance. Thus, Ellen has a duty to perform before receiving payment. However, in this case Ellen was receiving progress payments during the course of her performance.
DUTIES
Ellen had a duty to perform under the contract at the agreed upon price of $15,000. Bill had been paying her progress payments throughout the course of her performance. Thus, Ellen has no legal excuse for repudiating the contract and quitting.
Therefore, Ellen had a duty to perform.
BREACH
An unjustified failure to tender performance under the terms of the contract.
Ellen is in breach because she repudiated the contract and quit. Bill will argue that this is a major breach because her performance goes to the essence of her contract with Bill.
Therefore, Ellen's failure to perform is a breach of contract.

REMEDIES
General Damages - Expectation
Bill will be able to recover his expectation damages under the Bill/Ellen contract in order to put Bill back into the position he would have been in had the contract been performed by Ellen. Bill paid Ellen $3,000 for the work she had completed. Bill then had to pay Roger $20,000 to complete Ellen's work. Bill's total expense for the electrical work was $23,000. Bill will be able to recover the difference between the difference between his cost of covering for Ellen's breach and contract price agreed to with Ellen.
Therefore, Bill will be able to recover $8,000 from Ellen in expectation damages.
Special Damages - Consequential - Hadley v. Baxendale
Bill will try to recover his $10,000 bonus from Ellen because the project was not completed on time solely due to Ellen's breach. Under Hadley v. Baxendale, recovery of damages is limited to the foreseeable costs of breach. The facts state that at the time that Bill entered into his contract with Ellen that Ellen was unaware of Bill's on-time bonus. Because Ellen was unaware of the bonus, she had no reason to know of the lost profits that Bill would suffer if she breached the contract.
Therefore, since Ellen could not foresee the loss of $10,000 in profit to Bill at the time of the formation of her contract with Bill, the $10,000 will not be recovered by Bill.
Incidental Damages
Bill will be able to recover incidental expenses incurred in the course of trying to find a replacement for Ellen and to bring suit against her for breach.

Bill will also be able to recover damages incurred by Doug as a result of Bill's failure to complete the project on time. As discussed supra, Doug will be able to deduct his damages due to Bill's late completion from Bill. Bill will be able to pass those expenses on to Ellen.

QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER B
1. IS ELLEN LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES DOUG MAY HAVE INCURRED AS A RESULT OF THE LATE COMPLETION.
THIRD PARTY CONTRACT
A third party contract is one that is intended to benefit a party other than the promissor and promisee and is made at contract formation.
PRIVITY
In a third party contract, a party must be a vested, intended beneficiary in order to enforce the contract.
INTENT TO BENEFIT
It must be shown that the contracting parties intended for the third party to benefit from the contract when it was formed.
Here there is nothing in the contract between Ellen and Bill to indicate that there was an intent to benefit Doug.
VESTING
An intended beneficiary's interest vests when they learn about the contract and assent to it.
An intended beneficiary may enforce a third party contract when their interests become vested.
DONEE OR CREDITOR BENEFICIARY OR INCIDENTAL BENEFICIARY
A donee beneficiary is one that receives benefit of the contract as a gift; a creditor beneficiary receives the benefit to satisfy an obligation due him by the promisee. An

incidental beneficiary is one that will benefit from the contract but is not an intended beneficiary.
Doug would be an incidental beneficiary of the Bill/Ellen contract and would not have standing to enforce or recover under it.
CONCLUSION
There was no enforceable agreement between Doug and Bill that would allow him to recover.
2. IS ELLEN LIABLE TO BILL
WHAT LAW GOVERNS THE CONTRACT?
This is a contract building services and will be governed by the rules of the common law because it is not a contract for the sale of goods.
CONTRACT
A contract is an agreement between two [or] more parties the law will enforce. To be valid it must contain an offer, acceptance and consideration.
The facts indicate that there was a valid contract present between Doug and Bill and that contract contained a specified time of completion and an on-time bonus.
There was also a valid contract between Bill and Ellen for the electrical work to be done for $15,000.
STATUTE OF FRAUDS SATISFIED?
Under the common law certain contracts have to be in writing to be enforceable. These include contracts in consideration of marriage, those that cannot be completed in less than a year, executor guarantees and suretyship or those dealing with real property.

It's unclear if this contract is in writing, but because it can be completed in a year and is for a building not an interest in land it would not need to be in writing.
It appears the Statute of Frauds is satisfied.
DISCHARGE OF DUTY
A party's duty may be discharged if they have a valid excuse.
IMPOSSIBILITY
If it becomes objectively impossible for anyone to perform the duties under the contract, the defendant's duty may be discharged.
Ellen will claim that it is impossible for her to perform because she could not profitably do the electrical work for $15,000. This is not a valid excuse because someone else could do the work.
FRUSTRATON OF PURPOSE
When both parties know at the time of contract formation of a specific reason for the contract and the nonoccurrence of an event that was to occur happens and then the basis for the bargain is destroyed excusing the party from performance.
Here Ellen will claim that the purpose for her taking the contract was to turn a profit and when she couldn't do that her purpose in entering into the contract was frustrated.
This is an error in judgment, not a happening the nonoccurrence of would destroy the bargained-for exchange.
Frustration of purpose is not a valid defense.

COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY
When there is extreme and disproportionate disparity in the expense or effort in performance that was not part of the original agreement, the defendant may claim extreme financial hardship. The 10x rule is generally applied to see if completion of the agreement would cost the defendant ten times more than agreed. If so performance may be excused.
Commercial impracticability will fail because another contractor completed the electrical work for $20,000, which is not ten times the agreed upon price.
There do not appear to be any valid events that would discharge Ellen's duty to perform.
BREACH OF CONTRACT
A breach is the failure to perform one's absolute duty when it comes due.
Ellen failed to perform her duty because she quit after receiving $3000 in progress payments.
IS THE BREACH MAJOR OR MINOR
This would be a major breach because it severely impacted the bargained-for exchange when Ellen quit after completing only one-third of the work.
REMEDIES
DAMAGES - MONETARY AWARD FOR THE LOSS OF THE BENEFIT OF THE BARGAIN
a. THE LOSS OF THE ON-TIME BONUS
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
Under Hadley vs Baxendale consequential damages may be awarded for those damages that result from the failure of a contract. These must be contemplated by

the parties at the time of formation, be clearly caused by the breach, be certain in amount, and could not have been avoided.
Here Bill will contend that the loss of the on-time bonus was solely caused by Ellen's quitting the job, as the facts indicate; so the loss was clearly caused by the breach by Ellen. The amount was certain because the on-time bonus was stated in the Doug/Bill contract to be $10,000. Bill will also argue that the loss could not have been avoided because he put forth his best efforts, but could not complete the work in time. On the other hand Ellen will argue that she had no idea of the on-time bonus when she entered into the agreement with Bill. The facts state Ellen was not aware of Bill's on-time bonus; therefore the loss by Bill was not contemplated by both parties at the time of formation. Ellen will further argue that she didn't learn about the bonus until before she began the job.
It appears that Ellen will have the stronger argument.
CONCLUSION
The fact that Ellen did not know about the on-time bonus at the time the contract was formed will most likely preclude Bill from recovering that amount from her.
b. FOR ANY OTHER DAMAGES
EXPECTATION DAMAGES
Expectation damages are to recover the benefit of the bargain for the non-breaching party.
Bill should be able to recover the difference between what he had to pay Roger, $20,000, and the contract price of the original contract $15,000, or $5,000. He may be able to recover the additional $3000 that Ellen received in progress payments, if he can show that the work was one-third complete and the cost to finish was an additional $20,000. If that is the case, Bill should be able to recover $8000 from Ellen.


?California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
June 2015

?The State Bar Of California
Committee of Bar Examiners/ Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300 845 South Figueroa Street . Los Angeles, CA 90017-2515 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
JUNE 2015
CALIFORNIA FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the four essay questions from the June 2015 California First- Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers were assigned high grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were produced as submitted by the applicant, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. They are reproduced here with the consent of the authors.
??Question Number 1.
2. 3.
4.
Subject Criminal Law
Contracts T orts
T orts
??
June 2015 ESSAY QUESTIONS
California
First-Year Law Students' Examination
Answer all 4 questions.
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines that are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?
QUESTION 1
Arthur and Cassie worked at an art gallery. They wanted to make some extra money by selling art from the gallery on eBay. They intended to share the proceeds with the owner of the gallery, but did not tell him about it because Arthur and Cassie did not think the owner would approve.
The building in which the gallery was located was undergoing earthquake renovations, which resulted in the building being open through the roof to the building next door. Arthur approached Woody, an employee of the building contractor, and offered him $500 to take a wrapped package from the gallery and stash it in the building next door so that Arthur and Cassie could pick it up later.
Arthur gave the wrapped package and $500 to Woody after the gallery had closed for the evening. Woody took the package up to the roof and, as he was crossing into the next building, he fell through the gap and tumbled three stories, landed on the package and was killed. The art in the wrapped package was destroyed.
Cassie was waiting outside the building to get the package from Woody. When Woody did not arrive with the package, Cassie went back into the gallery, took several more paintings and took them home.
Woody's body was found by a construction worker. Arthur and Cassie were arrested.
1. What criminal offense or offenses, if any, can be reasonably argued were committed by Arthur? Discuss.
2. What criminal offense or offenses, if any, can be reasonably argued were committed by Cassie? Discuss.
3. What defenses, if any, can each of them raise? Discuss.
?
1. State v. Arthur
Solicitation
QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER A
??Asking or enticing another to commit a crime with specific intent for that person to commit the crime.
The State will contend that when Arthur approached Woody and offered him $500 to take a wrapped package from the gallery and stash it in the building next door, Arthur committed the act of asking Woody to steal the painting thus satisfying the asking of another to commit a crime. In addition, Arthur had the specific intent for Woody to steal the painting because he had the conscious desire to "make some extra money by selling art from the gallery on eBay" thus satisfying the specific intent requirement.
Therefore Arthur will be liable for solicitation.
Merger
Solicitation will be merged with the conspiracy or any of the intended crimes as discussed infra.
Therefore the solicitation will be merged.
Conspiracy
Agreement between two or more persons to commit a crime, with specific intent to commit that crime. Modernly, an overt act is required.
??
Agreement between two or more persons
The State will contend that when Arthur gave the wrapped package and $500 to Woody and that "Woody took the package up to the roof", there was an implied agreement between Arthur and Woody because Woody carried the package with the intent to help Arthur commit the stealing of the art.
Arthur will counter that Woody did not expressly state that he agreed to help Arthur; thus there should not be a conspiracy present. However, the fact that Woody took the package and the $500 from Arthur implied that Woody had the intent to help.
Moreover, Arthur and Cassie formed the idea to make extra money by selling art from the gallery on eBay; therefore there was an agreement between Arthur and Cassie to steal the painting from owner.
Therefore an agreement was present.
Specific intent to commit crime
Arthur had the intent to sell the art from the gallery on eBay; therefore Arthur had the specific intent for Woody to commit the crime.
Therefore Arthur had the specific intent to commit the crime.
Overt Act
Here, Woody took the wrapped package from Arthur and the $500 and took the package up to the roof.
Therefore Woody committed an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy.
???
Larceny
Trespassory taking and carrying away the personal property of another without consent, with specific intent to permanently deprive.
Trespassory taking
The State will contend that when Arthur gave the wrapped package to Woody and Woody took the package up to the roof, Arthur did not have the consent of owner for the taking and selling because if he had consent, he would not have to take the painting through the roof.
Therefore a trespassory taking occurred.
Carrying away (Asportation)
Woody took the package up to the roof; thus the package moved from one location "from the gallery" and was moved to the roof.
Therefore there was a carrying away. Personal property of another
The package from the art gallery belonged to owner.
Therefore the property of another.
With specific intent to permanently deprive
As discussed supra, Arthur had the intent to make some extra money and sell the art on eBay; thus he had the specific intent to permanently deprive because owner's art
?????
would be sold and owner would have lost the property.
Therefore Arthur will be liable for Larceny.
Burglary - Common law
Breaking and entering the dwelling house of another, at night, with the specific intent to commit a felony therein.
Here, there was no dwelling because it was a gallery. In addition, the nighttime requirement was not present because the fact stipulated that Arthur gave the wrapped package to Woody after the gallery had closed for the evening, and not nighttime.
However, Arthur may be liable for burglary under modern law.
Burglary - modernly
Trespassory entry into any structure with intent to commit a crime therein.
Trespassory entry
The State will contend that when Arthur entered the gallery to remove the art to give to Woody to carry to the building next door, Art did not have the consent from owner to enter the gallery to remove the package because a reasonable person in owner's shoes would not have consented for such entry.
Therefore a trespassory entry occurred.
Any structure
Here, Arthur took the art from the gallery thus satisfying the any structure requirement.
????
Intent to commit a crime therein
As discussed supra, Arthur had the intent to steal the art to sell in on eBay but did not tell the owner; thus Arthur had the intent to steal the art from the gallery.
Therefore Arthur will be liable for burglary under the modern law.
Murder
Unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought. Malice can be shown by the following: (1) intent to kill; (2) intent to cause grave bodily harm; (3) wanton/reckless disregard to an unjustifiable high risk to a human life, and (4) felony murder.
Here, Arthur was found liable for the burglary under modern law; thus he may be found liable for felony murder if all the elements are met.
Felony murder
At common law, any killing during the commission of a felony is a felony murder. Today, the law classifies felony murder under two types: (1) first-degree felony murder; and (2) any other felony murder.
First-degree felony murder
Any death during the commission of an enumerated felony that is inherently dangerous. Enumerated felonies consisted of: Burglary, Arson, Rape, Robbery, and Mayhem.
Arthur was found supra to be guilty of burglary; thus Arthur may be liable for felony murder if all the elements of felony murder are met.
????
Elements of felony murder
To be convicted of felony murder, the following must be met (1) the defendant is guilty of the underlying felony, (2) the killing is distinct from the felony, (3) foreseeable risk of death, and (4) the killing occurred during the commission of the felony.
Guilty of the underlying felony
As discussed supra, Arthur was found guilty of the burglary.
Therefore Arthur is guilty of the underlying felony.
Killing is distinct from the felony
Here, the killing occurred when Woody fell through the gap and tumbled three stories and was killed; thus the killing is distinct from the felony of burglary and larceny.
Therefore the killing was distinct from the felony.
Foreseeable risk of death
The State will contend that the death of Woody was foreseeable because tensions are usually high during larceny and burglary because the defendants are on edge and expect things to go wrong. In addition, the building was open through the roof because of an earthquake; thus it was foreseeable that the foundation was unstable.
Therefore this element is met.
Killing occurred during the commission of the felony
Here, Woody fell through the roof when he was carrying the package taken from Arthur;
?????
thus he had yet to reach a safe zone. Thus the felony of burglary was still in process. Therefore the killing occurred during the commission (res gastae).
Therefore Arthur will be found guilty of felony murder.
1st-Degree murder
Specific intent to kill with premeditation and deliberation, or first-degree felony murder.
Here, the fact does not stipulate that Arthur had the intent to kill Woody nor that there was any premeditation or deliberation present.
However, Arthur will be found guilty of felony murder under the first-degree felony murder.
2nd-Degree murder
Arthur may be found guilty of second-degree murder if the first-degree murder is not applicable.
Involuntary Manslaughter
Should the Court not found Arthur guilty of the underlying burglary, then Arthur may be found liable for involuntary manslaughter because of his reckless behavior of attempting to steal the art from the gallery to sell for his own profits.
Defenses
Arthur does not have any defenses and will be liable for the above crimes.
????
I. Crimes of Arthur:
QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER B
?A. Conspiracy: At Common Law, a Conspiracy was an agreement between two or more people to do an unlawful act (crime) or lawful act by unlawful means with both the intent to agree and the intent that the target act be made to occur. Modernly, acts for conspiracy are limited to crimes, and many jurisdictions require an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy.
1. The agreement: Here, it appears that we have two agreements: One between Arthur and Cassie to sell art from the gallery and then sell it, and one between Arthur and Woody to take and move the wrapped package from the gallery and put in into the building next door.
a. The Agreement between Arthur and Cassie: In this situation, the Agreement to do a crime (Larceny/Embezzlement and possibly Burglary as discussed below). The facts tell us that Arthur and Cassie both "wanted to make some extra money by selling art from the gallery." Thus, it appears that both
b. The Agreement between Arthur and Woody: In this situation, it is less clear that Woody shared Arthur and Cassie's intent to commit any crime. Arthur paid Woody $500 to take the wrapped package from the gallery, but it is not clear whether Woody knew that such an act was intended to help Arthur and Cassie commit any crime. Since Arthur and Cassie were art gallery employees, it may not have been immediately apparent to Woody that they were working to commit any crime. Under majority rules, a Conspiracy requires two guilty minds. Only if Woody shared Arthur and Cassie's intent that a theft crime be committed, not merely acting as an innocent agent, will there be two guilty minds in this case. Under the Minority Model Penal Code (MPC) rules, one can be guilty of a Unilateral Conspiracy with only one guilty mind. In this case, Arthur could still be guilty under these facts. It appears likely, therefore, that a conspiracy will not be found in these circumstances.
???
2. Intent: Arthur clearly had both the intent to agree with both Cassie and Woody and the Intent that the theft crime be committed.
3. Overt Act: An overt act clearly occurred when Arthur gave the wrapped package to Woody. This act would count under either above noted agreement.
4. Conclusion: It appears most likely that Arthur will be found guilty of Conspiracy at based on his agreement with Cassie if not also for his agreement with Woody.
B. Larceny: A Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal property of another with the intent to permanently deprive.
1. Trespassory Taking and Carrying Away: Arthur took and carried away (asportation) the wrapped art when he handed it to Woody. Here, it appears most likely that Arthur, if he had any possessory right to art at all, only had mere custody from his employer, the art gallery, to handle the art. This would make the taking trespassory. It does not appear that Arthur had any lawful possession of the art, but, if he did, the crime would be Embezzlement as noted below.
2. Personal Property of Another: The Wrapped Art was clearly the personal property of the art gallery and not Arthur.
3. With the Intent to Permanently Deprive: Arthur had the intent to sell the art later on eBay. Even if the art gallery could get it back later, the high risk that they would not be able to would still constitute the intent to permanently deprive.
4. Conclusion: It appears most likely that Arthur will be guilty of Larceny since all of the elements appear to be established.
C. Embezzlement: An Embezzlement is the Unlawful Conversion of the property of another already in one's lawful possession.
???????
This will only apply if, as noted above, Arthur already had lawful possession of the art in the wrapped package when he decided to steal it, and this does not seem likely. Larceny appears to be the better theft crime here.
D. Burglary: At Common Law, Burglary was the trespassory breaking and entering of the dwelling house of another at night with the intent to commit a felony. In Modern jurisdictions, the dwelling house requirement has been expanded to cover all protected structures (structures with a roof), the nighttime requirement has been eliminated, and the Breaking requirement has been limited in favor of an expansion of the Trespassory Entry.
1. Trespassory Breaking and Entering: Here, it appears that Arthur waited inside the art gallery until it closed for the evening. At Common Law, this would not have constituted a trespassory breaking and entering since Arthur appears to have lawfully entered the gallery when he came to work that day. By remaining inside after closing, however, Arthur may have committed a "Constructive Breaking" in many jurisdictions.
Additionally, assuming that Woody is Arthur's innocent agent, the acts of Woody can be imputed to Arthur. Here, Woody climbed through an opening in the roof. Since the roof was already open, at Common Law, this could not constitute a breaking. In Modern jurisdictions, the breaking requirement has often been eliminated or severely limited such that a Burglary might still be found here.
2. Dwelling House of Another: At Common Law, the art gallery could not be considered the dwelling house of another. Under Modern Law, this has been expanded to cover all protected structures, structures with a roof, so this requirement would be satisfied.
3. At Night: It appears that this event occurred "after the gallery had closed for the evening," so most likely the Common Law nighttime requirement (after sundown) would be satisfied.
???
4. Intent to Commit a Felony: At Common Law, a larceny was a felony, but under modern law it is often not. In this situation, however, most modern jurisdictions expand the felony requirement to include larceny and other theft crimes, so this requirement could still be satisfied.
5. Conclusion: It appears most likely that in a modern jurisdiction, but not in a Common Law jurisdiction, a Burglary would be found. Arthur would also vicariously liable for the crimes of Cassie in taking the painting directly after Woody did not show up. Depending on the value of the paintings stolen, some jurisdictions would also consider Grand v. Petty larceny for this crime.
E. Murder:
Murder is a homicide committed with Malice.
Homicide: A homicide is the killing of another human being.
Causation: Here, it appears that the acts of Arthur may not have directly caused the death of Woody; however, Arthur did set the events in motion that eventually lead to Woody's death and could be liable for his death here.
Malice: Malice can be established in any of four ways: 1. Intent to Kill, 2. Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Injury, 3. Wanton or Willful Conduct., and 4. Felony Murder. Only the last two could apply here since there is no evidence of any intent to kill or seriously injure on the part of Arthur.
3. Wanton or Willful Conduct: In order to have Wanton or Willful Conduct, the defendant must 1. Create the risk, 2. Know of the Risk, and 3. Consciously disregard the high risk of serious bodily injury or death resulting from these actions. It is not clearly that Arthur was aware of any risk to Woody as a result of his actions in carrying the package across the roof to the other building, but it is clear that walking across a roof at night and
??????
crossing between buildings possesses some risk of serious harm. In addition, Arthur did not create the gap; however, he could still be said to have created the risk based on his agreement with Woody to carry the art. Based on the above, it is also not perfectly clear whether Arthur could have consciously disregarded any risk he was not aware of; however, if he was aware, he seems to have disregarded it. It appears most likely, therefore, that the actions of Arthur rose to the level of Wanton or Willful Conduct.
4. Felony Murder: The Felony Murder Rule states that one who kills during the commission of an inherently dangerous felony is guilty of murder.
a. Inherently Dangerous Felony: In most jurisdictions and at Common Law, Burglary is considered an inherently dangerous felony. See above for a consideration of whether a Burglary occurred. No other crime noted could generally satisfy this requirement.
Some jurisdictions also consider the manner in which the crime was committed but even there it would be clear that walking across a roof at night and crossing between buildings possesses some risk of harm and might still constitute an inherently dangerous felony.
b. During the Perpetration: Woody clearly died as he was carrying the art to the other building, which was during the perpetration of (flight from) the Burglary if the did in fact occur.
Degree: If a Felony Murder was found to have been committed, the Murder would be First-Degree. If only Wanton and Willful Conduct can be established, the Murder will be second-degree.
Conclusion: It appears most likely here that a Felony Murder occurred, and Arthur will be charged with First-Degree Murder.
?????
F. Involuntary Manslaughter:
If Arthur's Conduct did not rise to even Wanton or Willful Conduct, Arthur could still be found liable for the death of Woody under Involuntary Manslaughter for his Criminally Negligent Conduct in suggesting the actions of Woody or based on Misdemeanor- Manslaughter if the theft is a misdemeanor or a non-dangerous felony (larceny).
II. Crimes of Cassie:
Cassie, as a co-conspirator and accomplice (Aiding, Abetting, or encouraging with the Intent to Aid, Abet, or encourage and the Intent that the crime be committed), will be guilty of the Conspiracy and Larceny/Embezzlement under the same facts as noted above for Arthur. Additionally, Cassie will be liable for Larceny/Embezzlement for the taking of the paintings in the gallery directly after Woody did not arrive with the packages. We are also not told how Cassie "went back into the gallery." If such an entry could constitute a Burglary, especially under Modern Law as noted above, Cassie could also be independently liable for Burglary.
III. Defense of Cassie and Arthur:
1. Impossibility: Cassie and Arthur might raise the defense of impossibility, that is, that it was impossible for them to steal the paintings that Woody was carrying since he never was able to deliver them and the art was destroyed. As noted above, this will not constitute a valid defense since the larceny occurred with Arthur handed Woody the package even though the entire criminal scheme was not complete.
2. Unforeseeable actions: Arthur may claim that he should not be liable for the actions of Cassie in taking the paintings after Woody did not arrive; however, Cassie and Arthur were clearly co-felons and Cassie's taking the paintings was clearly in furtherance of the Conspiracy (Pinkerton Rule), so Arthur should be vicariously liable for his actions.
??
Overall, it does not appear that Arthur or Cassie will have any affirmative defenses to their criminal conduct.

QUESTION 2
Betsy owns a business in South City. Her friend, Walter, lived in Northville, some distance away. Over the years, Betsy had often suggested to Walter that he move to South City and work for her. A short time ago, Walter decided to follow Betsy's suggestion. He called Betsy and asked if she was still interested in hiring him. Betsy replied, "Of course. Get down here as soon as possible and we can see where you would fit in." Walter agreed and told her that he would give notice at his current job and would be in South City by the end of the month.
Walter gave notice at work and shipped his furniture to South City at a cost of $5,000 and bought a one-way plane ticket for $250.
When Walter called Betsy upon his arrival in South City, she told him that she had just lost a major customer and had to impose rigorous cost-cutting. She therefore could no longer employ him.
Walter tried for two months to find another job in South City but nothing was available. Walter's previous employer was willing to rehire him, so he moved back to Northville, paying another $5,000 for movers and $250 for airfare.
1. What claim or claims, if any, does Walter have against Betsy? Discuss. 2. What damages, if any, should Walter be awarded? Discuss.
?
Walter v. Betsy
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER A
Common Law governs
The uniform commercial code (UCC) does not apply to this transaction since this transaction does not deal with goods since this contract instead deals with employment and services. Therefore, the common law principles of law will apply.
Formation
In order to have a valid contract, there must be a valid offer, valid acceptance, valid consideration and no valid defenses.
Preliminary Negotiations
Communications that do not express a present contractual intent to be bound but rather to discuss likely negotiations.
The facts indicate that Walter and Betsy have communicated over the years in which Betsy suggested Walter move to South City and work which does not adequately show a present contractual intent to be bound since terms are not definite and they are simply expressly an interest to deal. Therefore, the parties have not yet made an offer or are not bound by any obligations at this point.
Is Walter's phone call to Betsy a valid offer?
Offer is defined as an outward manifestation of present contractual intent to be bound by terms that are definite and certain and communicated to the offeree.
The facts state that Walter called Betsy, which is an oral communication for Walter, the offeror, to Betsy, the offeree, of present intent to work for Betsy indicated by asking Betsy if she is still interested in hiring him.
However, the communication does describe the subject matter and intended parties of Walter working for Betsy, which is a potential employment opportunity, but does not

sufficiently define the essential terms since it fails to describe with certainty when Walter will begin working for Betsy, for how long, does not specify price of how much Walter will be paid.
Furthermore, it lacks the present contractual intent since Walter is only asking if Betsey is interested and does not make any promises or commitments to be bound.
Therefore, this will not be considered an offer since it is not sufficiently definite and certain in terms and lacks present contractual intent.
Is Betsy's phone call response to Walter a valid offer? offer defined supra.
The facts state that Betsy, the possible offeror, orally communicated to Walter, the possible offeree, to "Get Down here as soon as possible and we can see where you would fit in;" however, this communication does not show a present contractual intent to be bound by terms that are definite and certain since it does not sufficiently define with certainty a price term of how much Walter would be paid, does not state a time of performance of when Walter would begin working or for how long. The phrase we can see where you fit in also does not describe the subject matter and nature of what is being bargained for.
Therefore, Betsy's call to Walter was not a valid offer.
Acceptance?
A valid acceptance is a voluntary unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
The facts state that Walter agreed, but there was no valid offer for Walter to agree or assent to since there was no communication sufficiently definite in terms manifesting a present intent to be bound.
Therefore, there was no acceptance, and no mutual assent required for a contract.

Consideration
There is no mutual assent resulting from offer and acceptance, nor is there sufficiently defined consideration since neither party is sufficiently bound by any definite bargained- for term in exchange of a promise.
Promissory Estoppel
Promissory Estoppel is a substitute where consideration is lacking. A promise made by the promisor which should reasonably expect to induce action or forbearance on the part of the promisee and does induce such action or forbearance (Restatement 90 includes of a substantially certain nature) is binding if injustice can only be avoided by the enforcement of the promise.
Walter expressed his willingness to work for Betsy and suggested being hired by Betsy and agreed to Betsy's communication "Get Down here as soon as possible and we can see where you would fit in," indicating that Betsy, as the promisor, was making a promise to Walter that he could move down and work for her, and Betsy had a reason to expect to foreseeably induce Walter, as the promisee, into moving from Northville, which is known by both to be some distance away, to South City where Betsy is located and relocating all of his personal items with him is so doing.
Furthermore, Walter told Betsy that he would give notice at his current job, indicating that Betsy should reasonably expect to induce action on the part of Walter, the promisee, to quit his job in reliance on Betsy's promise that she will provide him with a job if he moves down.
That state that Walter was so induced by Betsy's promise because he in fact did give notice to his job, and quit, shipped his furniture to South City at a cost of $5000 and bought a one-way place ticket for $250.
The facts then state that Betsy revoked her promise to Walter to work at her business located in South City because she had lost a major customer and had to impose rigorous cost-cutting and therefore could no longer employ Walter.

However, Walter had already relied on the promise to detriment by relocating himself and all of his things to South City and quit his job in Northville. Therefore, there was injustice to Walter that resulted from his reliance on Betsy's promise as a result of relocating himself and quitting his job reasonably expecting to have a job with Betsy in South City.
The nature of the induced action and forbearance is reasonably certain and definite since it can be shown that Walter quit his job, and paid money to relocate himself and his belongings to South City from Northville.
Injustice could only be avoided by enforcing the promise since Walter was unable to work for Betsy since she revoked her promise and Walter was unable to find a job elsewhere in South City since he looked for two months and found nothing, indicating that he moved himself and all his belongs and quit his job for no gain or benefit to his detriment in reliance on Betsy's promise.
Furthermore, Walter was forced to relocate himself back to Northville and pay another $5000 for movers and $250 for airfare to get himself back to the place had the promise not occurred and back to the only place in which he could reasonably find other employment.
Reliance Damages
Since Walter relied to his detriment on Betsy's promise, see promissory estoppel supra, Walter would be entitled to reliance damages which are out-of-pocket expenses incurred to put Walter in the position he was in had he not relied to his detriment on the promise by Betsy.
These damages include the cost of relocating himself and his belongings from Northville to South City including the initial $5000 cost of shipping his furniture, plus the $250 plane ticket which is $5250 dollars since he would not have paid for this had he not relied to his detriment on the promise by Betsy.

Furthermore, it is possible to show that reliance damages would also include the additional cost of moving back to Northville including the $5000 cost of shipping his furniture, plus the $250 plane ticket to move back to work for his previous employer since this would put Walter in back in the position he would be in had he not relied to he detriment on Betsy's promise to quit his job with the previous employer and move himself to South City in reliance of having other employment and the need to relocate himself and all his things back to Northville.
Therefore, it is possible for Walter to recover reliance damages from Betsy, based on promissory estoppel, in the total of $10,500, including the cost of relocating himself back and forth from Northville to South City in reliance of Betsy's promise to work for her to his detriment. It is noted that there was no valid contract between Walter and Betsy; therefore Walter was not entitled to expectancy damages, and had to rely on reliance damages for recovery limited to out-of-pocket expenses to put him in the position Walter would be in had he not relied on the promise to his detriment.

1. Walter v. Betsy
Applicable Law
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER B
??The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) governs all contracts for the sale of goods. All other contracts, including service contracts, are governed by the common law.
Goods are defined as tangible moveable property. This fact pattern does not concern tangible moveable property, but a service contract for at-will employment. Therefore the common law will govern.
Valid and enforceable contract
For Walter to have a claim of action against Betsy, he must demonstrate that there was a valid and enforceable contract. Absent an enforceable contract, Walter may argue that he is entitled to damages under a theory of detrimental reliance.
A valid and enforceable contract must have a clear offer, acceptance, consideration, and lack any valid defenses to formation.
Offer
An offer is a manifestation of present intent to contract, with clear and definite terms, communicated to an offeree. At common law, the following terms are generally required in an offer to be considered valid: parties to be bound, subject matter, duration, time of performance, and price. The offeror is considered "master of the offer" and may indicate a specific method of acceptance.
According to the facts, Walter recently called Betsy and "asked if she was still interested in hiring him." This is likely to be considered by a court as a request for an offer, rather than an offer itself, because it does not contain any clear terms and is not a clear and
??
unambiguous manifestation of intent to contract. It appears merely as a request or an inquiry, which courts have typically found to be negotiations rather than offers. Walter's initial question is likely not an offer.
However, Betsy's reply to Walter's inquiry may be considered a valid offer if it is found to contain the requisite terms. Her statement "of course," in reply to Walter's inquiry likely indicates a manifestation of present intent to be bound as a clear and unambiguous statement. It was made in conversation with Walter, so it is clearly communicated to an offeree. "Get down here as soon as possible" indicates a time for performance (as soon as possible). "We can see where you would fit in" likely indicates the subject matter (employment at Betsy's business). However there are two significant missing terms: price and duration.
Modern courts are split on how to treat offers of at-will employment such as this. Following traditional common law rules, Betsy has indicated an intent to contract but has not made a fully valid offer, lacking the essential terms of price and duration.
Acceptance
A valid acceptance is an unambiguous manifestation of assent communicated in a timely manner.
The facts state that Walter "agreed" to the offer, and further, that he would take immediate steps to perform by giving notice at his current job and moving to South City by the end of the month. This is both an unambiguous statement of assent, and a timely response.
Therefore there is likely a valid acceptance if there has been a valid offer.
Consideration
Consideration is evidence of a bargained-for exchange of legal detriment or legal
??
benefit. At common law, both parties must demonstrate valid consideration, though courts do not generally judge the value of the consideration itself. In an executory bilateral contract, the exchange of promises to perform is sufficient consideration.
In this case, both Walter and Betsy have made promises: Walter to quit his current job, move to South City, and work for Betsy; Betsy to hire Walter and "see where (he) would fit in." These promises may be sufficient consideration, although as mentioned supra, some courts tend to treat promises of at-will employment to be merely negotiations until employment has begun. Depending on how a court views at-will employment promises, there may be valid consideration.
Detrimental Reliance - Promissory Estoppel
This scenario is a clear case of detrimental reliance, a theory that allows a court to enforce promises that have not created a valid and legally enforceable contract. Detrimental reliance requires that i) one makes a promise with the intent to induce reasonable reliance on the other party, ii) the other party foreseeably and justifiably relies on that promise to his detriment, and iii) unenforcement of the promise would create injustice.
The theory of promissory estoppel is often invoked to estop one party from claiming no contract exists as an excuse to perform where there has been clear detrimental reliance.
Walter will argue that Betsy's specific offer of employment, coupled with her repeated suggestions over the years that Walter move to South City and work for her, were promises made with the intent to reasonably induce reliance. Indeed, it was foreseeable that Betsy's repeated suggestions and clear offer would foreseeably induce reliance on the part of Walter. Thus this element is met.
Walter did in fact reasonably and justifiably rely to his detriment on Betsy's promise when he i) gave notice at work, ii) shipped his furniture to South City, iii) spent $5,250
?
on shipping and plane tickets, and iv) moved to South City. Thus, the element of actual reliance is met.
If a court finds that there was no valid offer made by Betsy to Walter, a theory of detrimental reliance can be used to prevent injustice and either enforce the promise as if a contract existed or provide Walter with reliance damages.
Statute of Frauds
Certain contracts, including ones that will take over a year to perform, must be contained in a signed writing to be enforceable. Since this agreement was for at-will employment, which theoretically could be completed at any time if either party decides to quit or cancel the contract in good faith, this agreement is not covered by the statute of frauds.
Breach
A material breach is found where one party has been substantially deprived of the benefit of the bargain, has had commercially reasonable expectations frustrated, or has suffered significant economic loss as a result of one party's failure to perform.
Walter will argue that he has been substantially deprived of the benefit of the bargain and suffered a loss of reasonable expectations and economic benefit when Betsy changed her position and said she could no longer employ him since he took substantial steps and made significant expenditures expecting to be hired. Betsy's refusal to hire Walter strikes to the essence of the agreement and therefore will be considered a material breach if there is a valid and enforceable contract in existence.
Excuses to Performance - Unforeseeable Event
Betsy may argue that her failure to perform is excusable based on unforeseeable change in circumstances.
???
Commercial Impracticability
Commercial impracticability requires that circumstances not contemplated or reasonably foreseeable at the time of contracting have occurred, causing severe economic hardship to one party.
As a businessperson, Betsy will likely be held responsible for reasonably foreseeing that she might lose a major customer. The loss of one customer may be significant to her, but it likely will not create severe enough economic hardship to convince a court to excuse her duty to perform if there is an enforceable contract.
In conclusion, if there is a valid and enforceable contract in existence, a court will likely find Betsy in breach of that contract. More likely, a theory of detrimental reliance will be used to prevent injustice absent a valid contract, and promissory estoppel will prevent Betsy from backing out of her promise since Walter relied on her promise to his detriment.
2. Damages
In a general breach of contract situation, expectation damages are the standard remedy.
Expectation Damages
Expectation damages are calculated to place the non-breaching party in the position he would have been had there not been a breach. This might be calculated as the difference between what Walter is able to earn and what he expected to earn under the agreement with Betsy. Since Walter was able to find employment with his previous employer, his expectation damages might ultimately be very little. He will have a duty to mitigate his losses if he elects to seek expectation damages, which is likely satisfied because he "tried for two months to find another job in South City but nothing was
????
available."
Thus, he may only be able to recover potential lost wages during the course of his two- month unemployment if he is able to prove with certainty what those losses are under a theory of expectation damages.
Reliance Damages
Alternatively, the doctrine of detrimental reliance entitles Walter to reliance damages absent a valid and enforceable contract. Reliance damages are calculated to restore the plaintiff to the status quo ante, or the position he was in before the agreement/breach occurred.
Under a reliance damages theory, Walter would be entitled to recover his reasonable expenses on shipping his furniture to and from South City ($5,000 * 2) and his roundtrip airfare ($500), but likely not his living expenses during those two months nor his potential lost wages. Thus, Walter can recover $10,500 in reliance damages.
?
QUESTION 3
Tommy is fourteen years old. Tommy plays golf every day at his local golf course, using a golf cart. Although children are generally not allowed to rent carts at the course, Tommy has a special relationship with the owners of the course, who consider him to be of unusual maturity. He is generally allowed to use the golf carts as long as they are available.
One day, while driving a cart from the first to the second hole of the golf course, Tommy failed to watch where he was going and ran into Dana just as she was swinging her golf club. Because of the accident, Dana's shot left the golf course, and the ball fell into an air intake at nearby Power Plant, causing it to cease operations. Power Plant had failed to attach the required screen on the air intake when it opened the plant.
Perry lives ten miles from the golf course. He relies on a constant supply of oxygen in order to stay alive. When Power Plant shut down, Perry's equipment stopped supplying the needed oxygen, and he suffered brain damage.
What possible tort causes of action does Perry have against Tommy? Discuss.
?
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER A
Is Tommy liable in Negligence to Perry for his damages?
In order for Perry to succeed in his negligence claim against Tommy, he has to prove every element of negligence (Duty/Standard of care, Breach, Causation, and Damages) by a preponderance of evidence.
Duty: Did Tommy owe a duty of care to Perry? In other words, did Tommy have to conform to certain standard of care to prevent or avoid unreasonable risk of harm to Perry?
General Duty Rule: If the majority view (Cardozo View) is used, a defendant owes a duty of reasonable care only to foreseeable plaintiffs in the zone of danger created by the negligence of the defendant. If the minority view (Andrews' view) is used everyone owes a duty of reasonable care to the world at large to exercise reasonable care to avoid unreasonable risk of harm to others.
In this case, Tommy did owe a duty of reasonable care to Perry if the minority view is used because he was engaged in the game of golf and he hit the ball that could reasonably hit someone and cause damage. If the majority view is used then it would be difficult to establish that duty, because Perry lived 10 miles away from the golf course.
Assuming that the minority view is used, then Duty is established.
Standard of Care: Generally the standard of care is that of a reasonable prudent person of the same physical capabilities, same age, same skills or knowledge and in like circumstances. In this case, since Tommy is 14, he would be held to the standard of a 14-year-old of the same physical capabilities, same skills, same experience and in the like circumstances. In other words, under normal circumstances he will be held to
?
the standard of a 14-year-old who plays golf. However, because he was driving a cart he would be held to the standard of an adult who plays golf and drives a golf cart.
Breach; is unreasonable conduct. In other words, a defendant would breach his duty when his conduct falls below the standard of care and it could be established by the use of, 1. Unreasonable conduct Test; 2. Negligence Per Se, or 3. Res Ipsa Loquitur.
In this case, the Unreasonable Conduct Test would be applicable to determine breach and we can also use the Learned Hand Test to address breach.
Did Tommy fail to act reasonably towards Perry? Tommy was driving a golf cart that is generally reserved for the use by adults. However, the owner of the course had allowed him to use it (even though it is deemed an adult activity). While driving the cart, Tommy failed to watch where he was going as a result of which he ran into another player, Dana, when she was swinging her golf club. In other words, Tommy failed to pay attention while driving a cart, which is a motorized vehicle and by failing to pay attention he ran into Dana.
Using the Unreasonable Conduct Test it would be established that he failed to act reasonably while driving a motorized vehicle when he did not pay attention where he was going.
By using the Learned Hand Test (B<LP) we could also establish whether the burden on him to pay attention while driving a cart was less than the likelihood of harming someone times the seriousness of the harm while considering the social utility of the activity.
Driving a cart in a golf course is very common and almost every player uses one to get from one hole to another. Thus the social utility is established. However, when driving a cart the likelihood of running into another player or another cart is also high if one is not paying attention and/or is distracted for any reason. Once the driver runs into someone then there is a good chance of causing damages to property and/or the
??????????
person who is engaged in the game or driving another cart. Since carts do not go very fast, the magnitude is not as high as driving a regular car on the streets. Nevertheless, the driver of a cart has to use care to avoid unreasonable risk of harm to others. The burden on the defendant to drive carefully and slowly while paying attention to where he is going is far less than the harm that could be caused by driving carelessly causing accident.
Thus, Breach is established.
Causation: The plaintiff must also prove that the defendant's negligent act was but the actual and proximate cause of his injury
Actual Cause: In order to show that there was a causal relationship between the act of the defendant and the injury suffered by the plaintiff we can use the "But-for Test". In other words, but for Tommy running accidentally into Dana, her ball would not have left the golf course and fall into the air intake of the power plant causing the electricity to be ceased that the power plant to be shut down that led to the oxygen to be cut off for Perry, who suffered damages.
Proximate Cause: Even if the P could show the actual cause he should still show that the act of the defendant was the legal or proximate cause of his injury. In other words, was the injury suffered by the P the foreseeable consequence of the D's act that he could have reasonably foreseen with no superseding intervening act that would cut off his liability?
Was the injury suffered by the P a foreseeable consequence of the D's act? This would be very difficult to establish because of its remoteness. In other words, there are two intervening acts/events that have to be addressed that may or may not cut off the defendant's liability, depending on many factors that would be discussed below.
Intervening act/event: any act or event (act of God, act of a third party or animal) that occurs after the D's act that combined with the act of the D would be the cause of the injury suffered by the plaintiff.
????
In this case, there was first the intervening act of Dana's golf ball leaving the golf course and falling into the air intake of the power plant. Was this a dependent intervening act? The answer is yes, because there are other golf players who are on the golf course that Tommy could have run into as a result of his negligence when driving the cart.
Was the intervening act a foreseeable one? Yes, because as noted above, golfers are on the course playing golf and hitting their balls and if hit by another cart it is reasonably foreseeable that their ball would go in a different direction than it is intended. It is also foreseeable that the other golfer herself or himself may miss the intended target and hit the ball elsewhere than it is intended.
The next question to address is whether the injury suffered by the plaintiff was foreseeable or unforeseeable? If foreseeable then liability is present, because the intervening act was dependent and the injury was foreseeable. However, if unforeseeable, like in this case, was it the type of injury that was unforeseeable or the extent of it. The extent would not be an issue based on the "eggshell concept."
However, if the type of is unforeseeable, it would depend on whether the Polemis jurisdiction is applicable or Wagon Mound jurisdiction. If Polemis is used, then as long as the defendant's act was the direct cause then the type of injury even if it is unforeseeable the liability is present. However, if the Wagon Mound is used, then only the foreseeable injury would cause the liability.
In this case, the factor that questions the liability of the defendant is that Perry has a special problem that requires 24 hours use of oxygen. Although this is not an usual condition, the fact that the way and the manner in which caused the failure of the power was fairly unusual and too remote, because he lived 10 miles away from the golf course, and it would be an impossibility for a golf ball go that far to hit a person and injure him. The only way Perry was injured was because of the power failure that cut off his electricity and thus his oxygen.
?
The next intervening act or event was the air intake of the power plant not having screen to prevent anything from falling into the machine that caused the failure. Thus, the second intervening act was the failure of the power plant that is reasonably unforeseeable and independent that does cut off the liability of the D.
In other words, had the power plant placed a screen over the air intake of the machine the ball would not have fallen inside causing the power failure. This negligent act of the power plant is a superseding intervening act that would cut off the liability of Tommy.
Harm: Perry did certainly suffer a cognizable harm, as evidenced by the facts of the case, because after his oxygen was cut off by the power failure in the area, he suffered brain damage.
Defenses: Although in a negligent act the D may exercise Contributory negligence, comparative fault and Assumption of Risk, in this case, it would be very difficult to assume that Perry was in any way contributing to his injury or assumed to risk or was comparatively at fault.
However, if one assumes that he was so dependent on his oxygen that he should have taken other precautionary measures, such as having a reserve tank of oxygen, just in case there is a power failure, or that his tank runs out, or to have a backup power source, then he may be comparatively at fault in which case, his recovery would be reduced by the percentage of his fault. If in the jurisdiction contributory negligence is applied and he is found liable then he would be barred from recovery if his contributory negligence was in any way the proximate cause of his injury. Assumption of care would not apply because he did not knowingly assume the specific risk of harm he suffered.
????
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER B
Perry v. Tommy
Negligence - Negligence can be established by showing duty, breach of duty,
causation and damages.
Duty - Under the majority rule general duty of due care is owed to all possible tortfeasors.
However, the majority rule states that a duty is owed to all foreseeable tortfeasors within the zone of danger. If this case were being tried in a jurisdiction following the minority rule, a very strong argument could be made that given Perry lived ten miles from the golf course, he was not within the zone of danger and Tommy would owe no duty to Perry.
We will assume that this is in a jurisdiction following majority rules and Tommy owes Perry a general duty of due care.
Breach of duty - Breach of duty can be established using negligence per se, res ipsa loquitor, the Learned Hand theory, and by using the reasonably prudent person test.
In this situation, the reasonably prudent person test applies best.
Because Tommy is only 14 his standard of care will be measured against a child of similar age, experience and intelligence. However, when a child is engaged in an adult activity, they will be held to the adult standard of care. Because we are told that at the golf course where Tommy was, children are not generally allowed to rent carts on the course, it could be considered an adult activity and therefore Tommy should be held to the standard of care of a reasonably prudent adult.
Tommy may try to assert the argument driving a golf cart is not specifically an adult activity like driving a car or operating equipment. However, because this golf course
??
limited the driving of golf carts to adults only, it would be considered an adult activity in this situation and he would therefore be held to the standard of an adult.
There is an argument to be made that perhaps a reasonably prudent adult may have failed to watch where he was going while driving the golf cart, causing him to run into Dana. However, a stronger argument can be made that a reasonably prudent adult knows that when they are driving a golf cart on the course, where there are likely to be other players, they should be paying special attention to their surroundings. Therefore, it can be said that Tommy breached his duty owed.
Causation - For Perry to be successful in his cause of action it must be shown that Tommy was the actual and proximate cause of his injuries.
Actual Cause - For Tommy to be the actual cause of Perry's injury it must be shown that but for his negligence, Perry would not have been injured.
But for Tommy failing to watch where he was going and as a result hitting Dana, causing the ball to go into the air intake at Power Plant, Perry would not have lost the power to his equipment which supplied him with oxygen.
However, had Power Plant attached the required screen on their intake, the golf ball would not have fallen into the air intake. Had Tommy not failed to watch where he was going and had Power Plant not failed to attach the required screen, Perry would not have been injured. Based on this, it can be said that Tommy's conduct of failing to see Dana and running into her just as she swung her club was a substantial factor in contributing to Perry's injuries.
Proximate Cause - For Tommy to be the proximate cause of Perry's injuries it must be shown that the type of harm sustained was reasonably foreseeable and that there were no intervening acts.
Type of harm - When one causes a golf ball to go astray, one could reasonably expect
?????
to hit someone causing injury, or to break a window or a car parked close by. However, because we are told that Perry lived ten miles from the golf course, it could be argued that it would not be reasonable to expect that someone would sustain injuries as a result of negligent conduct on Tommy's part while on the golf course. Additionally, one would not reasonably foresee that as a result of running into someone on the golf course, a golf ball would go into a power plant intake causing the plant to cease operations resulting in Perry losing power supply to his equipment that supplied him with oxygen.
Intervening act - The fact that Power Plant had failed to attach the required screen on the air intake would be considered an intervening act. For it to cut off Tommy's liability it must be a type of act that was not foreseeable. An argument could be made that because this screen was a requirement, it was not a foreseeable intervening act. One would expect Power Plant to have the necessary equipment on their plant and follow what was required of them. However, because there are many instances in which people fail to follow requirements of them, this could be considered a foreseeable event which would not cut off Tommy's liability.
However, because of the type of injury Perry suffered and because of the fact that he was 10 miles from golf course, Tommy would not be found to be the proximate cause of Perry's injuries, which would cut off his liability for Perry's injuries.
Had liability been established on Tommy's part, he could assert the defense of contributory negligence/comparative fault.
Contributory Negligence - One must act reasonably to protect themselves from harm.
Comparative Fault - See rule for contributory negligence.
A very strong argument can be made that a reasonable person, who relied on their oxygen to stay alive, would have some type of backup plan to ensure that their supply of oxygen was always available. Because there is no indication that Perry had a backup
?
plan or acted in a reasonable manner to ensure that he had oxygen at all times, he could be found negligent and have contributed to his injuries.
In a jurisdiction using contributory negligence, if Perry were found to have contributed to his injury through his own negligence, his recovery would be barred.
In jurisdictions using comparative fault, a plaintiff's recovery will be decreased by the amount that their own negligence is determined to have contributed to their injury. Because Comparative Fault is used in the majority of jurisdictions, Perry's recovery will be reduced by the percentage that his own negligence is determined to have contributed to his injury.

QUESTION 4
Abe was the head coach of the fifth-grade girls' basketball team at Elementary School. Bob, the assistant coach, blamed Abe for the team's poor performance. Seeking to have Abe fired, Bob accused Abe after a game of stealing money from the team fund. Bob made the accusation while standing in a crowd of students and parents. Bob knew the accusation to be untrue.
In retaliation, Abe threw a basketball at Bob, who ducked to avoid being hit. The basketball missed Bob but struck Carl, a parent, in the face. Abe then went up to Bob and told him, "You'd better watch your back," which subsequently caused Bob to have nightmares.
Abe was thereafter fired from his position as head coach, based on Bob's accusation that Abe had stolen money from the team, and he was unable to obtain a job in his chosen profession.
1. Under what theories, if any, and against whom, might Abe sue for damages? Discuss.
2. Under what theories, if any, and against whom, might Bob sue for damages? Discuss.
3. Under what theories, if any, and against whom, might Carl sue for damages? Discuss.
?
Abe v Bob Defamation
QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER A
A defamatory statement made by D concerning of P published to a third party that causes damages to P's reputation.
Here Abe was the coach of the basketball team and was being blamed for the team's bad performance. Bob made an accusation in front of the crowd of students and parents. Bob knew the accusation to be false. This would constitute a defamatory statement because it was known to be false.
Concerning of P
Here the statements were about Abe because he was mentioned directly. Published to a third party
Here Bob made the statements in front of the students and parents who presumably understood.
Damages to P's reputation
Here being accused of stealing money would damage one's reputation because it implies that you are a dishonest person and reflects on your character as a person and morals. The facts indicate that due to the defamation Abe was fired and was not able to obtain a job in his profession.
Slander per se
Slander is spoken defamation. It is per se if it falls within the following categories:

business, crime involving moral turpitude, chastity of a woman and loathsome disease.
Here the statements were regarding theft and dishonesty. This would constitute moral turpitude crime because it tarnishes the P's reputation as an honorable and honest person and alludes that P is a criminal who stole money from the team fund.
Additionally it also falls within the business and profession category because as a head coach he was held in a trust position to dispose of the team funds and entrust in training the girls. This accusation would reflect badly on his ability to do his job and on his trustworthiness.
Therefore the defamation is slander per se and if there are no damages they would be presumed.
Constitutional Issues
If the P is a public figure you need to prove actual malice which is falsity and fault as to the defamation. If it is a private person you only need to establish a prima facie case.
A public person is one who gains notoriety or thrust himself into the public eye.
Here Abe seems to be public person amongst his peers because he is the head coach and is known by the students and teachers. Usually all the students and parents know the sport coaches. Not only was he known by his peers from the school he coached since he was the head coach but was also known by other schools that compete against the coach's team. Among the sports community the coaches know of other school coaches thus other schools would know of Abe and his work as a coach, whether he is a good coach and has won games or a bad one and lost championships.
Therefore in this regard Abe will be considered a public person.

Falsity and Fault
There needs to be intentional or reckless disregard for its truth or falsity. If the matter is private then there needs to be at least negligence.
The facts state that Bob knew the statements to be false nevertheless Bob intentionally made the statements in front of everyone with the purpose to damage Abe's reputation.
Therefore there is malice and Abe would be entitled to recover actual damages and may recover punitive damages.
Damages
Here the facts state that Abe lost his job due to the defamation and was not able to get other jobs because his reputation was tarnished.
Therefore Abe will be entitled to recover damages.
Defenses Qualified Privilege
Bob will raise that his statements were privileged because they were for the public interest. Because it was in the interest of the school and the parents to know the type of coach Abe was.
However this defense will not hold because the statements were made intentionally with malice since he knew the statements were not true.
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
An extreme and outrageous intentional act that causes severe emotional distress on P. Here the accusation of Abe to be a thief who stole the money of the team's fund would

be considered extreme and outrageous because it transcends the boundaries of decency because one does not call another a thief in such a manner in front of parents and students in a big crowd. It would be embarrassing to a reasonable person and would cause severe emotional distress.
Therefore Bob will be liable for IIED and would have to pay damages that Abe incurred due to the severe emotional distress.
Bob v Abe
Assault
Intentional act that causes reasonable apprehension of imminent harm to another person.
Here Bob will argue that when Abe threw the basketball it caused him to be apprehended because he believed he was going to be hurt by the ball. Indeed one can be hurt when a basketball is thrown at you, Bob even ducked which shows that he was reasonably apprehended.
Therefore Abe will be liable for assault.
Assault for the Statement made by Abe
Here Bob will argue that the statement made by Abe of "you'd better watch your back" caused him apprehension. However words of future harm are not enough to constitute assault. There was no apprehension of imminent harm because it was a future threat.
Therefore there would be no assault for the statement made by Abe.

Battery
Intentional act that causes harmful or offensive touching to another person.
Here Abe threw the ball towards Bob; however the ball never touched him. Therefore there was no harmful or offensive contact and he will not be liable for battery.
Intentional Infliction of emotional distress (IIED) Supra definition.
Here Bob will argue that Abe's words of "you'd better watch your back" caused him severe emotional distress. However these words alone are not extreme and outrageous to cause emotional distress. Abe is not accusing him of a crime nor calling him names. However the court may find this to be extreme and outrageous because it was coupled with the throwing of the basketball. Additionally the facts state that Bob suffered nightmares which are physical symptoms of the severe emotional distress.
Therefore Abe may be liable for IIED.
Defenses
Self Defense
It can be used to protect but it has to be reasonable force necessary under the circumstances.
Here Abe will argue that he threw the ball to Bob because he had made defamatory statements about him in front of everyone. However a physical contact is not a reasonable response to a defamation.
Therefore this defense will not hold.

Carl v Abe
Assault
Supra definition
Here the facts do not state whether Carl saw the ball coming towards him. If he did it was reasonable for him to be apprehended because a ball coming towards you is an imminent harm.
Therefore if Carl saw the ball and was apprehended, Abe will be liable for Assault.
Battery
Supra definition
Here the facts state that Abe threw the ball towards Bob but instead hit Carl. Thus causing Carl a harmful contact.
Transfer Intent
Under this doctrine the intent to cause a tort to one may be transferred to another person, or if it caused a different tort than the intended.
Here the intent to Abe to hit Bob will be transferred to Carl. When Bob ducked the ball hit Carl instead. This presumably caused him harm or at least an offensive touching.
Therefore Abe will be liable for Battery.
Carl v Elementary School
Vicarious Liability
When an employer is liable for the conduct of his employees that are within the scope

of the employment.
Here Carl will try to sue the school because he was injured in the game organized by the school when Abe hit him with the basketball. Abe is the school basketball coach thus the school employee and he injured Carl while doing his job while coaching a game which is within the employment scope.
However most courts do not impute liability to employers when the employee's conduct is intentional.
Here Abe's conduct was an intentional tort, a battery. Therefore the school will not be liable for Abe's conduct.

I. Abe's Claims
Abe v. Bob
QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER B
??A. Defamation: when a defendant makes a false statement about another that he knows to be false or is negligent as to its truth or falsity, and it is communicated to a third party, he is liable to that person for all harm caused thereby.
False Statement: a statement that is untrue about the plaintiff.
In the current case, the facts tell us that Bob made statement about Abe stealing from the team fund that he knew to be false. Therefore this element is met.
Communicated to a third party: This is either accomplished by libel (printed matter) or slander (verbally communicated) where the defendant says it directly to a third party or in manner which they are reasonably certain the third person will hear or read it.
In the current case, Bob made the false statement while standing in a crowd of students and parents. Bob was reasonably certain that this false statement would be heard by third parties. Therefore the element of communication is met.
Plaintiff is harmed thereby: In the current case the facts tell us that Abe was fired as a result of the false statement made by Bob and was not able to find another job. Clearly Abe was harmed thereby.
Slander per se: When the false statement made was such that would shock the conscience and hold the subject of the statement up to ridicule, scorn, hate and contempt, especially one that impacts one's work and job, this can be slander per se.
In the current case, the type of slander made by Bob was one that accused him of being a thief, something that would shock the conscience of a regular person. It clearly
?????
caused Abe to be scorned and hated as he was fired as a result of it and could not find another job in his chosen profession.
Therefore Bob would clearly be liable to Abe for Defamation.
Defenses: There do not appear to be any good defenses for Bob to use.
B. Abe v. Elementary School
Wrongful Termination: If an employer terminates an employee for wrongful reasons, they may be liable for damages.
Abe will claim that the school only fired him because of the false statement made by Bob. Since the statement was untrue, the firing as a result was wrongful. However, in the current case, the facts are not clear. Abe may very well have been an 'at-will' employee and therefore Elementary School could fire him at any time (so long as the termination was not based on race, religion or gender). Therefore there does not appear to be a good claim here against Elementary School for wrongful termination.
II. Bob's Claims
Bob v. Abe
A. Assault: When the defendant intentionally puts the plaintiff in fear of an imminent battery, this is an assault.
Battery: An intentional act which causes the harmful or offensive touching with the body of another or something closely connected to it.
Intentional: when the act is done voluntarily and not as a result of a reflex or lack of control.
????????
Throwing of the basketball:
In the current case, the facts tell us that Abe in retaliation threw a basketball at Bob. This was clearly a volitional act with the intent of hitting Bob, that would thereby create a battery. However, Bob saw the ball coming and ducked. The fear of the imminent battery of the basketball thrown at him qualifies as an assault.
Therefore Bob has a good claim against Abe for assault.
Saying "You'd better watch your back":
The facts tell us that as a result of this statement Bob had nightmares. However, an assault has to be the fear of an imminent battery. Just making a statement or threat that pertains to some time in the future would not suffice. In the current case, Abe's words to Bob cannot be classified as a proper fear of an imminent battery and therefore the element of assault will not be met in this regard.
B. Intentional infliction of Emotional Distress (IIED): when the defendant does an extreme and outrageous conduct that causes severe emotional distress to the plaintiff.
Extreme and outrageous conduct: an action by defendant that would shock the conscience of a reasonable person. Words alone do not suffice.
In the current case, while nightmares may be classified as severe emotional distress (provided that Bob could somehow prove that they resulted from Abe's statement), the facts tell us that Abe only said words and words alone do not suffice for IIED.
Therefore it does not appear that Bob will succeed against Abe for the claim of IIED. III. Carl's Claims
Carl v. Abe
A. Battery: see above.
???????
Transferred intent: If defendant intended to commit an intentional tort against one party and instead it was accidently committed against another party, the intent element is transferred to the party that received the tort.
In the current case, the facts tell us that Abe intended to throw the basketball at Bob; however Bob ducked. When the ball struck Carl in the face, the intent of battery that Abe intended against Bob will transfer to Carl. Therefore, Abe will be liable for Battery against Carl.
B. Assault: see above.
If Carl saw the ball Abe threw coming and was in fear of the imminent battery, Abe will be liable for assault against Carl as well.
C. Negligence:
Duty: A person doing an action has a duty of care to all foreseeable plaintiffs.
In the current case, Abe threw a basketball. He therefore has a duty of care to anyone who may be harmed by the throwing of the basketball. This would clearly include Carl who was standing nearby when the ball was thrown.
Breach: where the likelihood of harm times the amount of harm is greater than the mitigation required to avoid such harm.
In the current case, Abe did not have to throw the basketball. He did it out of revenge against Bob. By throwing the basketball, he breached the duty of care that he could have easily avoided by not throwing it at all.
Causation: This requires two elements:
Actual cause: This is established by the 'but-for' method. But for the actions of
???????
defendant, plaintiff would not have been harmed. In the current case, but for Abe throwing the basketball, Carl would not have been hit by it.
Proximate Cause: The damages had to be a reasonably foreseeable outcome of defendant's actions.
In the current case, it is reasonably foreseeable that when you throw a basketball, someone standing nearby can get hit by it.
Damages: The plaintiff needs to be harmed thereby.
In the current case Carl needs to show that he was damaged as a result of being hit by the basketball. The facts are silent as to whether Carl incurred damage. If Carl can prove that he incurred damages as a result, then he is entitled to them as a result of Abe's negligence in throwing the ball.
Defenses: There does not appear to be any good defenses that Abe can offer. The fact that he was goaded into it by Bob's defamatory statements would not excuse his behaviors as he has recourse for that in the courts.
It therefore appears that Carl has a good claim against Abe for negligence.
???


?California First-Year Law Students' Examination
Essay Questions and
Selected Answers
October 2015

?The State Bar of California
Committee of Bar Examiners / Office of Admissions
180 Howard Street . San Francisco, CA 94105-1639 . (415) 538-2300
845 South Figueroa Street . Los Angeles, CA 90017-2515 . (213) 765-1500
ESSAY QUESTIONS AND SELECTED ANSWERS
OCTOBER 2015
CALIFORNIA FIRST-YEAR LAW STUDENTS' EXAMINATION
This publication contains the four essay questions from the October 2015 California First-Year Law Students' Examination and two selected answers for each question.
The answers were assigned high grades and were written by applicants who passed the examination. The answers were produced as submitted by the applicant, except that minor corrections in spelling and punctuation were made for ease in reading. They are reproduced here with the consent of the authors.
??Question 1.
2. 3.
4.
Number
Subject Contracts
Criminal Law T orts
Contracts
??
October 2015 ESSAY QUESTIONS
California
First-Year Law Students'
Examination
Answer all 4 questions.
Your answer should demonstrate your ability to analyze the facts in the question, to tell the difference between material facts and immaterial facts, and to discern the points of law and fact upon which the case turns. Your answer should show that you know and understand the pertinent principles and theories of law, their qualifications and limitations, and their relationships to each other.
Your answer should evidence your ability to apply the law to the given facts and to reason in a logical, lawyer-like manner from the premises you adopt to a sound conclusion. Do not merely show that you remember legal principles. Instead, try to demonstrate your proficiency in using and applying them.
If your answer contains only a statement of your conclusions, you will receive little credit. State fully the reasons that support your conclusions, and discuss all points thoroughly.
Your answer should be complete, but you should not volunteer information or discuss legal doctrines that are not pertinent to the solution of the problem.
You should answer according to legal theories and principles of general application.
?
QUESTION 1
Painter and Developer entered into a contract under the terms of which Painter was to paint the interior of Developer's new apartment building for a price of $40,000. The contract called for work to begin on June 1 and to be completed on July 1.
Painter was ready to start work on June 1, but Developer told Painter that because of problems with the drywall contractor, Painter could not start work until June 15. To avoid the possibility of losing her employees, who might quit if forced to take a two-week layoff, Painter took another job, which was not completed until June 20, at which time Painter started work on Developer's building.
On July 15, Painter informed Developer that she would not be able to complete the project until August 15. Developer told her he would lose substantial rental income if the project was not completed by August 1, when university students, his prime market, began moving in. He asked her to hire additional help, but she refused, saying the job would be finished on August 15 or not at all. In an attempt to get the job completed sooner, Developer fired Painter and looked for another painting contractor.
The best price Developer could get to have another painting contractor finish the job was $30,000. Before firing Painter, Developer had paid Painter one-half of the contract price. Because the painting was completed late, Developer lost $10,000 in rental income. This rental income would not have been lost if the painting had been completed by August 1.
At the time Painter was fired, she was out-of-pocket for $5,000 in materials. She expected a profit of $5,000 had she been allowed to complete the contract.
Developer has sued Painter for breach of contract. Painter cross-complained against Developer for breach of contract.
1. Who breached the contract? Discuss.
2. Assuming Painter breached the contract, what damages, if any, would Developer be entitled to? Discuss.
3. Assuming Developer breached the contract, what damages, if any, would Painter be entitled to? Discuss.
?
QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER A
1) Who breached the contract? Discuss.
DEVELOPER V. PAINTER
The rights and remedies of parties to a contract depend on there being a valid contract and the terms and performance thereof. A contract is a promise or set of promises for the breach of which the law provides a remedy and the performance of which the law recognizes as a duty. An enforceable contract consists of MUTUAL ASSENT (VALID OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE), CONSIDERATION and NO DEFENSES.
GOVERNING LAW
The sale of goods, those items moveable and tangible at the time of identification to the contract are governed by the UCC. All other contracts are governed by the common law.
Here, the agreement calls for painting services, which are not moveable at the time of contract and thus not goods. The agreement is for services, governed by the common law. Therefore, the common law governs.
CONTRACT FORMATION
Here, a contract exists because certain and definite terms have been agreed including Parties (Painter, Developer), Price ($40k), Quantity (1 job), Subject (Painting), Performance Date (June 1-July1). There has impliedly been acceptance and the consideration of legally sufficient, bargained-for exchange that induces performance and is a detriment to the promisee of $40,000 has been identified. The STATUTE OF FRAUDS, a requirement of a written expression for certain contract types does not

apply here as the provision of painting services is not one of the 5 types (Marriage, Over a Year, Land, Executory, Guarantor). Therefore, there is an impliedly valid contract.
CONTRACT TERMS
Here, the contract specified that performance was to begin June 1 and complete by July 1. There was no EXPRESS TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE clause; however the specificity of the dates of performance implies that time is a MATERIAL TERM.
CONTRACT PERFORMANCE
JUNE 1 - WAIVER OF START?
Here, on June 1, Painter was ready to start but an IMPLIED CONDITION PRECEDENT that the drywall be completed first was not satisfied. Therefore, because an IMPLIED CONDITION PRECEDENT was not satisfied, Painter's start was waived. Further, Painter took additional work to be completed June 20.
JULY 15 - ANTICIPATORY BREACH?
ANTICIPATORY BREACH is the unequivocal communication of a repudiation of a contract duty before that duty is due to be performed. The act allows the non-breaching party to treat as a BREACH and immediately take all legal remedies and seek to mitigate.
BREACH is a non-performance of a required contract duty. A MINOR BREACH is where the contract is substantially performed but not completely. A MATERIAL BREACH is where the non-breaching party is deprived of the substantial benefit of the bargain.

Here, there is an ANTICIPATORY BREACH because Painter tells Developer that "she would not be able to complete the project until August 15," which is a date after which performance was due. The BREACH is a MAJOR BREACH because although Painter had commenced performance, the parties had expressly made time a MATERIAL TERM and the substantial change from July 1 to Aug 15 of 6 weeks to finish (longer than the original period of work) would deprive DEVELOPER of the substantial benefit of the bargain. Developer also indicates that his clients are students who begin moving in by August 1. Therefore, Painter anticipatorily breached the contract with Developer and allowed Developer to declare a breach and seek legal remedies and to mitigate.

2) Assuming Painter breached the contract, what damages, if any, would Developer be entitled to? Discuss.
DAMAGES
Damages are compensation for contract harm and include MONETARY DAMAGES and EQUITABLE RELIEF.
MONETARY DAMAGES
Monetary damages include EXPECTATION DAMAGES, CONSEQUENTIAL and RELIANCE DAMAGES.
EXPECTATION DAMAGES
EXPECTATION DAMAGES give the non-breaching party the "benefit of the bargain". Where there is a BREACH, the non-breaching party is allowed to cure. The cure would be the difference between the market price and the contract price for the completion of the contract.

Here, Developer would be entitled to EXPECTATION DAMAGES equal to the difference between the market price to finish of $30,000 and the contract price of $40,000 less the amount already paid of $20,000 or $20,000.
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
Under Hadley-Baxendale, CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES that are foreseeable, contemplated at the time of contracting, certain and mitigated are awarded as compensation.
Here, at the time of contracting, it was not known to Painter that Developer intended to rent his apartment to students by Aug 1. Because it was not contemplated, such consequential damages even if foreseeable and certain (rental income is certain) would not be awarded.
RELIANCE DAMAGES
RELIANCE DAMAGES are amounts spent in reliance on the contract that would be awarded as if the contract had never happened.
Here, because Painter had spent $5,000 in materials for the job that had not been applied to the job, Painter would receive and Developer would owe $5,000 in reliance damages. Therefore, Developer would owe Painter $5,000 in reliance damages.
Therefore, if PAINTER BREACHED, Developer would receive a net $15,000 from Painter for completion of the job.
EQUITABLE RELIEF
Based on QUANTUM MERUIT, if there is inequity as a result of an award, EQUITABLE RELIEF may be sought to better value the damages.

Here, if Painter's work was largely complete, QUANTUM MERUIT might suggest that EQUITABLE RELIEF be used to adjust the damages to reflect the value of the work completed by Painter prior to the breach.
3) Assuming Developer breached the contract, what damages, if any, would Painter be entitled to? Discuss.
DAMAGES. Supra.
EXPECTATION DAMAGES. Supra.
Here, if Developer has breached, Painter would be entitled to the "benefit of the bargain" or the $5,000 in expected profits. Therefore, Painter would be entitled to $5,000 in expectation damages.
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES. Supra.
Here, if Developer has breached, Painter would be required to pay any consequential damages because Developer was the breaching party.
RELIANCE DAMAGES. Supra.
Here, if Developer has breached, Painter would still be entitled to the $5,000 in materials for the job in addition. Therefore, Painter would receive $5,000 in reliance damages.
Therefore, if DEVELOPER BREACHED, Painter would receive a net $10,000 from Developer for leaving the job.

QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER B
Question 1:
1. Who Breached the Contract? Discuss. Applicable Law?
The common law applies to contracts for the provision of services. Here, the subject matter of the contract is the painting of an apartment building. Painting is a service, something that requires labor as opposed to a sale of goods. Therefore, the common law applies to this contract.
Valid contract?
Here the facts state that there was a contract between Painter and Developer; thus there are no issues of offer, acceptance, or consideration (Painting work by Painter, $40,000 payment to Painter by Developer).
Defenses to Formation
Definiteness of Terms?
Under the common law, a contract requires that quantity, time of performance, identity of parties, price and subject matter be identified in the contract. The facts state the quantity - 1 apartment building to be painted, time - painting to take place between June 1 and July 1, parties - Painter and Developer, price - $40,000, and subject matter - painting of the apartment building have been identified. Thus, the contract will not fail due to indefiniteness.
?
Statute of Frauds:
The statute of frauds requires that certain contracts be written in order to be enforceable, including sale of goods contracts over $500, service contracts that cannot be completed within 1 year, promises for marriage, promises to answer for debt of another, and contracts for the sale of an interest in land.
The facts do not state whether the contract was made in writing. Here, none of these items apply to this contract. The contract performance time is just 1 month (June 1 to July 1), and although the contract involves painting work on a building, which is real estate, painting is a service, not a transfer of any title interest; therefore, the statute of frauds will not prevent enforcement of this contract.
Implied Covenants of contract:
An implied covenant is an implied promise by one party to a contract to do something. Developer, in making the contract, made an implied covenant that the building drywall would be ready for painting by June 1.
Conditions of contract:
A condition to performance is some event or action that must occur in order for the party to be charged to be found in breach.
Here, in order for the painting of the building to commence, there is an implied condition that the drywall must be completed, as drywall is a lower layer on a wall, and the paint is applied to the top of the drywall.

Performance:
The contract stated that the painting was to commence on June 1, and Painter was ready to start painting on June 1; however, Developer was not ready for the building to be painted, thus, Painter was unable to begin painting on June 1.
Breach:
A breach of contract is a failure of one party to a contract to perform his/her duties under the contract.
Painter will argue that Developer breached the contract on June 1 through an unequivocal statement that the building would not be ready for painting (drywall not ready) until June 15.
Materiality of Breach
A material breach is one that substantially negatively impacts the non-breaching party.
Developer's failure to have the building drywalled by June 1 as agreed to was a material breach, as this could cause a substantial loss of staff, who would have to take a two week layoff; had Painter known prior to contract formation that Developer wasn't going to be ready for painting until June 15, Painter likely would have attempted to find other work for his staff prior to Developer's breach.
Excuse of Condition
Developer's breach of his covenant (supra) to have the drywall prepared by June 1 was an excuse of the Painter's conditional performance to paint the building, because absent the drywall completion, the painting could not commence because paint must be applied to the drywall, not to the studs in the walls.

Course of Performance:
Course of performance refers to actions conducted by either party to the contract which will demonstrate what the parties actually agreed to. While Developer breached the condition of having drywall ready in time, Painter did not treat this breach as a full repudiation of the contract, but rather commenced work on the painting work on June 15.
Developer will argue that despite the delay in commencement of painting caused by Developer, Painter anticipatorily repudiated the contract by stating that the work would not be done until August 15. The difference in the originally agreed to start date (June 1) and completion date (July 1), was just one month, which would imply an agreed to completion time of one month from the start of painting. Painter completed his other project on June 20, which is approximately 55 days before his new estimated completion date of August 15. 55 days is much more than 1 month; therefore, Developer will argue that through the course of performance that altered the start date and by Painter stating unequivocally that he could not get done until August 15, it was Painter who breached.
Despite Developer's arguments, Developer was the breaching party.


2. Assuming Painter breached the contract, what damages, if any, would Developer be entitled to?
Consequential Damages
Consequential damages are awarded to compensate the non-breaching party for losses sustained as a consequence of the breach. As a consequence to the delay in the completion of the painting, Developer would not be able to rent the units in the building at their normal time, and lost $10,000 in income. Thus, $10,000 in consequential damages may be awarded.
??
Expectation Damages
Expectation damages are awarded to place the non-breaching party in the condition they would have been in had the contract not been breached.
In reliance on the contract, Developer had paid $15,000 to Painter. In addition, he ultimately had to pay another painter $30,000 to finish the job; thus his total cost of the contract was $45,000, which is $5,000 more than Developer had agreed to pay Painter. Because Developer would not have had to pay the additional $5,000 had Painter fully performed, Developer may be awarded $5,000 in expectation damages. This would put him back in the position of having only paid a net of ($45,000 minus $5,000 damages) $40,000 in exchange for a painted building.
Duty to Mitigate Damages
When a party to a contract breaches, the non-breaching party has a duty to mitigate damages. Here, Developer fulfilled this duty by soliciting bids and locating another painter to complete the painting job.
3. Assuming Developer breached the contract, what damages, if any, would Painter be entitled to? Discuss
Expectation damages
Rule: Supra
The facts state that while the contract price was $40,000, Developer only paid Painter $15,000. This is a difference in $25,000. Had the contract been fully performed, Painter would have received the additional $25,000; thus $25,000 in expectation damages may be awarded
??
Duty to mitigate damages
Rule supra
Upon hearing that the drywall would not be ready in time for painting, Painter went out and found another painting job for her and her staff to complete; thus by finding other work which would generate income during the waiting period, Painter fulfilled the duty as a nonbreaching party to mitigate damages.

QUESTION 2
Bob was an underpaid teller at Bank. On his lunch hour one day, he went into a store where he noticed a valuable necklace on the counter. He picked it up and put it in his pocket. Clare, a clerk at the store, approached Bob and asked him to put the necklace back. Bob punched Clare, returned the necklace to the counter, and fled back to Bank where he began waiting on customers.
One customer was Fred, Bob's close friend, who put down a ten-dollar bill and asked Bob for a roll of quarters. Bob then told Fred that he would secretly pass him one hundred dollars if Fred would later give him one-half. Fred agreed and later the two split the cash.
The next morning when Bob went to work, Marilyn, the bank manager, began questioning him in her office. Alarmed at this, Bob grabbed a letter opener and stabbed Marilyn in her arm. Then Bob fled outside, jumped in a car, and drove to the house of Gina, his girlfriend. He told Gina what had happened. Gina decided to call the police, but Bob knocked her unconscious, put her in his car and went to Fred's house to hide her.
Finding the door to Fred's house locked, Bob broke in the door and hid Gina inside. At that point Fred appeared and protested to Bob. Bob struck Fred, pushing him down. As Fred fell, he knocked over a lamp and started a fire. Bob panicked and ran out of the house. The house began to burn. Fred got out alive, but Gina died in the fire.
What crimes, if any, did Bob commit? Discuss.
?
STATE V. BOB
LARCENY
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER A
??The trespassory taking and carrying away of the property of another with the specific intent to permanently deprive owner thereof.
Bob picked up a valuable necklace that was on the counter at the bank. The taking was trespassory because it did not belong to Bob and he did not have permission to take it. He put it in his pocket; this is sufficient movement to constitute as a carrying away. The property did not belong to Bob, so it was that of another's. Bob will argue that he did not intend to keep it, especially since he put the necklace back. The State will argue that since the facts indicate that Bob was an "underpaid teller" it is likely that Bob specifically meant to take it and deprive the owner thereof so he could have the value. Additionally, only after he was caught did he put it back.
Bob is guilty of larceny.
ASSAULT
Assault is either the substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful application of force.
Substantial Step
Bob raised his arm to swing to punch Clare. The raising and swinging of his arm is a substantial step towards the perpetration of the subsequent hitting.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault, but it will merge with the subsequent battery.
??
Reasonable Apprehension
Since Clare was facing Bob, she would have been able to see him raise his arm to swing at her. Given that she had just caught him stealing a necklace, Clare could have anticipated a violent response and would have been in reasonable apprehension when she saw him raise his arm.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault.
BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to another's person
Bob punched Clare. Punching is an application of force and it was applied to Clare, another person. Bob did not have a right to do so; thus it was unlawful.
Bob is guilty of battery.
SOLICITATION TO COMMIT EMBEZZLEMENT
Solicitation is the counseling, enticing or inciting of another with the intent for that person to commit a crime. Embezzlement is the fraudulent conversion of rightfully entrusted property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
When Fred gave Bob a roll of quarters and asked for a ten-dollar bill, Bob told Fred that he would secretly give him $100. Bob enticed Fred to take the $100, instead of the $10 that he was owed, therefore depriving the bank (the owner) of the additional $90. Since Bob was a bank teller, he was rightfully entrusted with the money that he gave to Fred, but he converted the remaining $90 for purposes that were inconsistent with the Bank's ownership.
CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT EMBEZZLEMENT
An agreement between two or more parties to commit a crime.
????
Embezzlement is the fraudulent conversion of rightfully entrusted property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
Bob asked Fred to take the $100 and to split the extra cash with him. Fred agreed. Bob handed Fred the cash, which was a step towards the completion of the embezzlement.
Bob is guilty of conspiracy with Fred.
EMBEZZLEMENT OF $100
Embezzlement is the fraudulent conversion of rightfully entrusted property with the intent to permanently deprive the owner thereof.
When Fred gave Bob a roll of quarters and asked for a ten-dollar bill, Bob told Fred that he would secretly give him $100. Bob enticed Fred to take the $100, instead of the $10 that he was owed, therefore depriving the bank (the owner) of the additional $90. Since Bob was a bank teller, he was rightfully entrusted with the money that he gave to Fred, but he converted the remaining $90 for purposes that were inconsistent with the Bank's ownership. Bob may argue that he was merely in custody, rather than in possession, of the cash. If the court finds that this is true, then he will be guilty of larceny instead of embezzlement. See discussion infra.
Bob is guilty of embezzlement.
LARCENY OF $100
The trespassory taking and carrying away of the property of another with the specific intent to permanently deprive owner thereof.
Fred gave Bob a roll of quarters and asked for a ten-dollar bill. Bob told Fred that he would secretly give him $100. Bob enticed Fred to take the $100, instead of the $10 that he was owed, therefore depriving the bank (the owner) of the additional $90. If the
??
court decides that Bob is a low-level employee, they will find that he only had custody over the cash instead of possession and will be found guilty for larceny instead of embezzlement.
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT OF MARILYN
Assault is either the substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful application of force.
Substantial Step
Bob grabbed a letter opener to stab Marilyn. The grabbing and moving of his arm is a substantial step towards the perpetration of the subsequent stabbing.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault, but it will merge with the subsequent battery.
Reasonable Apprehension
Since Marilyn was facing Bob, she would have been able to see him grab the letter opener. Given that she had just caught him stealing, Marilyn could have anticipated a violent response and would have been in reasonable apprehension when she saw him raise his arm with the opener.
Aggravation
The letter opener was used as a deadly weapon, thus making this an aggravated crime.
Bob is guilty of this type of aggravated assault.
AGGRAVATED BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to another's person
Bob stabbed Marilyn. Stabbing is an application of force and it was applied to Marilyn, another person. Bob did not have a right to do so; thus it was unlawful.
?????
Aggravation
The letter opener was used as a deadly weapon, thus making this an aggravated crime.
Bob is guilty of aggravated battery.
ASSAULT of Gina
Assault is either the substantial step towards the perpetration of an intended battery or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of an imminent harmful application of force.
Substantial Step
Bob raised his arm to swing to punch Gina. The raising and swinging of his arm is a substantial step towards the perpetration of the subsequent hitting.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault, but it will merge with the subsequent battery.
Reasonable Apprehension
Since Gina was facing Bob, she would have been able to see him raise his arm to swing at her. Given that she had just threatened to call the police, Gina could have anticipated a violent response and would have been in reasonable apprehension when she saw him raise his arm.
Bob is guilty of this type of assault.
BATTERY
The unlawful application of force to another's person
Bob knocked Gina out. Punching is an application of force and it was applied to Gina, another person. Bob did not have a right to do so; thus it was unlawful.
Bob is guilty of battery.
?????
KIDNAPPING
The unlawful confinement and asportation of another.
Bob knocked Gina out and made her unconscious. Since Gina was unconscious and could not escape, she was confined. Bob then put her in the car and took her to Fred's house. This is movement and asportation of Gina.
Bob is guilty of kidnapping
AGGRAVATED BURGLARY
Common Law
Burglary is the breaking and entering into the dwelling of another in the nighttime with the specific intent to commit a felony therein.
Breaking and entering
Bob went to Fred's house. Since the door was locked, he broke it. This is sufficient for a breaking. Bob then entered.
Dwelling of another
Facts indicate that this was Fred's house. A dwelling
Nighttime
The facts do not indicate whether this event happens at night or not. Night is defined as the period between sunset and sunrise. Since the fact pattern began in the morning, it is likely still the daytime.
Specific Intent to Commit a Felony
Bob intended to hide unconscious Gina in Fred's house. As discussed supra, this is a kidnapping and a felony sufficient enough for this element.
???????
Since it is likely not the nighttime, Bob is not guilty of common law burglary. However, if it is the nighttime, then he would be guilty.
MODERN LAW BURGLARY
The trespassory entering into any structure with the intent to commit a crime therein.
Trespassory
Bob did not have permission to be in Fred's house. Thus his entry was trespassory.
Any Structure
Fred's house is a structure.
Intent to commit a crime
Bob intended to commit kidnapping as discussed supra.
AGGRAVATION
Since the house was occupied by Fred when Bob broke in, this crime is aggravated.
Bob is guilty of aggravated burglary.
AGGRAVATED ARSON
Common Law
The malicious burning of the dwelling house of another.
Bob pushed Fred, causing him to knock over a lamp and start a fire. Bob will argue that he did not intend for the house to catch fire, and therefore his action was not malicious. The State will argue that he should have reasonably expected and known that pushing Fred would have caused the fire. Since the facts indicate the house began to burn, it is likely that at least charring to the structure had occurred.
???????
If the court finds that Bob should have known pushing Bob would cause fire, then he will be guilty of common law arson. If court finds he did not know, then he will not be found to be malicious and will not be guilty.
Modern Law
The malicious burning of any structure.
Fred's house is a structure. See discussion supra.
AGGRAVATION
Since the house was occupied by Fred when the fire started, this crime would be aggravated.
HOMICIDE OF GINA
Homicide is the killing of a human being by another human being.
Bob pushed Fred, causing a fire which killed Gina.
Actual Cause
But for Bob pushing Fred and causing a fire, Gina would not have died when and how she did.
Proximate Cause
Bob will argue that it is not foreseeable that pushing Fred into a lamp would have caused a fire. State will argue that pushing a person into a lamp, which is either electrical or open fire, it is reasonably foreseeable that a fire could catch on the house and cause death to people within the house.
Bob is the actual and proximate cause to Gina's death.
?????
MURDER
The unlawful killing of another human with malice aforethought. Malice may be proven in one of four ways:
Specific Intent to Kill
Bob pushed Fred into a lamp, causing the lamp to catch the house on fire, killing Gina. Bob will argue that in pushing Fred, he did not specifically intend to kill Gina; he intended to harm Fred.
State will not be able to prove malice under this theory.
Intent to Cause Serious Bodily Harm
Bob pushed Fred into a lamp, causing the lamp to catch the house on fire, killing Gina. Bob will argue that in pushing Fred, he did not specifically intend to harm Gina; he intended to harm Fred.
State will not be able to prove malice under this theory.
Depraved Heart Act
State will argue that pushing Fred into a lamp, while Gina was unconscious in the house was a wanton and reckless disregard for the value of human life. State will argue that Bob should have reasonably foreseen the risk of fire and acted recklessly in pushing Fred, knowing that Gina could not escape in the case of a fire.
State will likely be able to prove malice under this theory.
Felony Murder Rule
Gina's death occurred during the perpetration of a burglary. Bob may argue that the burglary was complete as he had already broken into the house and Gina was kidnapped. However, State will argue that the burglary had not been completed
?????
because Bob had not reached a place of safety. In fact, he was fighting with Fred in attempts to get away.
State will likely be able to prove malice under this theory.
FIRST-DEGREE MURDER
First-degree murder is murder that is committed with the intent to kill with premeditation and deliberation, through bomb, poison, ambush, torture or mutilation, or through the commission of an inherently dangerous felony.
Bob will argue that he did not have the intent to kill, and thus could not have premeditated or deliberated. However, State will argue that Gina's death occurred during the perpetration of a burglary. Bob may argue that the burglary was complete as he had already broken into the house and Gina was kidnapped. However, State will argue that the burglary had not been completed because Bob had not reached a place of safety. In fact, he was fighting with Fred in attempts to get away. Bob may also argue that burglary and kidnapping are not inherently dangerous felonies.
Bob is likely guilty of first-degree murder under the felony murder rule.
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER
Second-degree murder is murder that is committed with the specific intent to kill, without premeditation, with the specific intent to cause serious bodily harm, depraved heart act, or a felony insufficient to support felony murder rule.
If the State is unable to prove first-degree murder under the felony murder rule, then they may argue the depraved heart act and that pushing Fred into a lamp, while Gina was unconscious in the house, was a wanton and reckless disregard for the value of human life. State will argue that Bob should have reasonably foreseen the risk of fire and acted recklessly in pushing Fred, knowing that Gina could not escape in the case of a fire.
??
At the very least, Bob will be guilty of second-degree murder.

PEOPLE v. BOB
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER B
Larceny of Necklace
Under common law, Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the property of another with the intent to permanently deprive.
Here, there was a "taking" when Bob put the necklace in his pocket from the store counter. There was a "carrying away" because he "moved" the necklace from its original location and he had the intent to permanently deprive because he put it in his pocket to steal a "valuable necklace" and when he got caught by the store clerk, he "returned the necklace to the counter and fled" back to his work.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with larceny of the necklace.
Assault on Clare (store clerk)
Under criminal law, assault is the intentional act to cause a battery or immediate apprehension of a battery, the harmful or offensive touching of another person.
Here, when Clare approached Bob and told him to put the necklace back, Bob punched Clare. Bob "intentionally" acted to commit a battery on Clare and the charge of assault will be included with the higher charge of battery.
Battery on Clare
Under criminal law, battery is the intentional harmful or offensive touching of another person.
???
Here, as discussed supra, when Bob "punched Clare" he intended to punch her and commit battery on her because she caught him stealing the necklace.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with battery on Clare.
Solicitation of Fred (friend) for embezzlement
Under criminal law, Solicitation is the urging of another person to commit a crime. The crime of solicitation is completed once the urging occurs and it does not matter if the person urged actually completes the crime or not. The crime of solicitation merges with the urged crime, if completed, and the person is vicariously liable for those crimes under the theory of accomplice liability.
Here, when Bob told Fred that he would "secretly pass him a one hundred dollar bill" instead of the roll of quarters that he requested, Bob was soliciting, "urging" Fred to commit a crime of accepting stolen property that he was embezzling from the bank. Because the "urging" was completed, Bob will be charged with the solicitation of Fred for the crime of embezzlement.
Conspiracy with Fred for Embezzlement
Under common law, Conspiracy is an agreement between 2 or more people to work toward an illegal goal. Modernly, an overt act is required in furtherance of the commission of the crime / conspiracy goal. The crime of conspiracy does not "merge" with other crimes so the defendant may be charged with both the crime of conspiracy as well as the completed crimes that are also committed.
Here, when Bob told Fred that he would secretly pass him the $100 and they would split it AND when Fred "agreed" and later split the cash with Bob, there was an "agreement" between Bob and Fred to steal / embezzle the $100 from the bank, an illegal goal.
Bob will be charged with a separate charge of conspiracy with Fred.
??
Embezzlement of bank $100
Under criminal law, Embezzlement is the taking of money with the intent to permanently deprive or putting at substantial risk, money or items that are lawfully in your possession that legally belong to someone else.
Here, when Bob purposely gave Fred the $100 instead of the roll of quarters, he took the money that was "lawfully in his possession" because he was a bank teller and used the money to perform his job. When Bob gave the $100 to Fred for them "to split the money" he intended to permanently deprive the bank of this money and did not intend to return it.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with embezzlement.
Assault of Marilyn (bank manager)
Assault is defined supra. Here, when Bob became alarmed when Marilyn began questioning him about the $100, he stabbed her in the arm with a letter opener. Because his "intent" was to cause her bodily harm and apprehension, Bob committed assault on Marilyn.
Bob will be charged with assault of Marilyn which will merge with the charge of Battery if he is successfully charged.
Battery of Marilyn
Battery is defined supra. Here, when Bob intentionally "stabbed Marilyn in the arm with a letter opener", he committed a "harmful and offensive touching" to Marilyn.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with the battery of Marilyn.
???
Larceny of Car
Larceny is defined supra. Here, when Bob fled outside the bank, because he "jumped in a car", it is presumed that it was not his car. If in fact, the car was not his or he did not have permission to use, a larceny may have been committed (grand theft) since he "took and carried" (drove away) the car of someone else. If Bob had the intent to NOT return the car, but to keep it or discard it when he was done with it, then there was an "intent to permanently deprive" and the elements of larceny are met.
If, however, Bob was just "borrowing" the car in his moment of panic to flee the bank because he had just stabbed Marilyn in the arm, then this element may not be met if he did not have the "intent to permanently deprive" the rightful owner. Additionally, it must also be considered that Bob's fleeing may be considered part of the chain of events from the stabbing of Marilyn since he had not yet reached a place of relative safety.
Therefore, Bob may be charged with larceny of the car.
Kidnapping of Gina (girlfriend)
Under criminal law, kidnapping is the wrongful taking or confinement of another person against their will. Under common law, it was required that the victim be transported across state lines. However, modernly that requirement has been dropped and is no longer required.
Here, because Bob knocked Gina unconscious and took her and put her in his car against her will because she was going to call the police, Bob "wrongfully took" Gina and "confined" her to the car when she was unconscious.
Therefore, Bob will be charged with the kidnapping of Gina.
??
Assault / Battery of Gina
Assault and battery are discussed supra. Here, when Bob knocked Gina unconscious, he committed assault and battery on her. He will also be charged with battery in addition to kidnapping Gina.
Burglary of Fred's house
Under common law, burglary is the breaking and entering the dwelling house of another at nighttime with the intent to commit a felony inside. Modernly, the rule has been extended to include any structure at any time of day and includes larceny as the intended crime, even if it is not a felony by statute.
In this case, Bob went to Fred's house to hide Gina whom he had kidnapped. Because Fred's house was "locked", Bob "broke the door and hid Gina inside" without Fred's permission or knowledge. Therefore, Bob both under common law and modernly committed "breaking and entering". However, the facts do not indicate the time of day. If it was during daytime the common law element would not be met. However, modernly this requirement is waived. Because Bob entered "Fred's house" this is the dwelling house of another. Bob intended to break into Fred's house to "hide Gina who had kidnapped", which is a felony.
The defense may argue that Bob had already committed the kidnapping when he knocked Gina unconscious and put her in the car, so the requirement to commit a felony inside of Fred's house is not met because he had already committed that crime. However, the prosecution will argue that Bob was still in the commission of committing the crime of kidnapping which would last the entire duration of her illegal confinement including when he took her to Fred's house to "hide her".
Therefore, it is likely that Bob will be charged modernly with Burglary of Fred's house.
??
Assault / Battery of Fred
Assault and battery are discussed supra. Here, when Bob struck Fred when he "protested to Bob", and Bob "pushed him down", Bob committed assault and battery of Fred.
Arson of Fred's house
Under common law, Arson is the malicious burning of the dwelling of another. Modernly, the rule has been extended to include any structure and malice means "with wrongful intent". The burning must include more than smoke and must include damage to include charring and actual burning.
In this case, because Fred fell and knocked over the lamp and started the fire, Bob did not intend to commit arson as he did not want or intend to start a fire.
Bob will not be charged with the arson for the burning of Fred's house.
Homicide / Murder of Gina in Fire
Homicide is the unlawful killing of another, which includes murder and manslaughter. Murder is the unlawful killing of another with malice aforethought. Malice aforethought can be accomplished in one of four ways: 1) intent to kill, 2) intent to cause severe bodily injury, 3) an extremely reckless disregard for an unjustifiably high risk to human life or 4) through the Felony Murder Rule.
FELONY MURDER RULE
The felony murder rule applies a first-degree murder charge to the defendant if the death occurred as a result of the commission of an independent inherently dangerous felony (burglary, arson, rape, robbery and / or kidnapping).
???
Here, as discussed supra, Bob may be charged with both burglary and kidnapping and therefore the death of Gina occurred during the commission of an inherently dangerous felony and therefore malice is presumed for a charge of first-degree murder.
Therefore, Bob will likely be charged with first-degree murder under the Felony Murder Doctrine for the death of Gina in the fire.
FIRST-DEGREE MURDER
First-degree murder is murder that requires premeditation, deliberation and a specific intent to kill. Here the facts do not support that Bob intended the death of anyone and he did not plan in advance the death of Gina or anyone else.
Therefore, Bob will not be charged with first-degree murder because there was no premeditation or specific intent to kill.
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER
All murder other than first-degree murder is second-degree murder, which requires a wanton or reckless disregard or an unjustifiable risk to human life. Here, it can be argued that Bob's actions were wanton and reckless in that "he panicked and ran out of the house as it began to burn".
However, although a strong case can be made for second-degree murder, Bob will be charged with first-degree murder under felony murder.
AFFIRMATIVE DUTY TO ACT
A person generally does not have a duty to assist others unless the person created that person's peril. Here, because Bob knocked Gina unconscious, kidnapped her and took

her to Fred's house which caught on fire, he had a duty to assist her in her peril and to attempt to save her.
Because Bob fled and did not attempt to assist Gina out of the burning fire when he had an affirmative duty because he placed her in peril, Bob will be charged with the murder of Gina.
VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Under criminal law, voluntary manslaughter is the intentional killing of another person that would be murder but for the existence of legally adequate provocation.
Here, there is not evidence to support that a reasonable person would have been provoked to act as Bob did under the same circumstances.
Therefore, Bob does not have a mitigating defense of adequate provocation and voluntary manslaughter will not apply.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER
Under criminal law, involuntary manslaughter is the unintentional killing of another person by means of gross criminal negligence, a deliberate breach of a pre-existing duty to protect others from risk of harm OR by recklessness, a deliberate creation of risk to others.
Here, because Bob did not intend to kill Gina, but his acts were extremely reckless, Bob would at a minimum be charged with involuntary manslaughter if the felony murder charge did not hold up.

QUESTION 3
David owns a herd of dairy animals from which he produces and sells milk and cheese. The animals in his herd are the product of cross-breeding domestic goats and a wild breed of sheep. They have the appearance and size of large goats, but have the much more aggressive character of bighorn sheep. In fact, the males have large curved horns similar to those of the bighorn and become aggressive when agitated.
One of the locks on a gate into a pen that held 40 of these animals was beginning to pull free from the wooden support post to which the lock was attached; a close inspection would have revealed that the wood was rotting around the screws that attached the lock to the 10-year-old post. Unfortunately, David failed to examine the gate support post when he performed his regular semi-annual inspection of the fencing on his land. Eventually the lock in fact pulled out, the gate swung open, and the animals wandered onto neighboring land.
Peter, David's next-door neighbor, found most of the animals on his land. Peter attempted to herd the animals back onto David's land, using an electric cattle prod to deliver shocks to them when they wouldn't move as he wished. When Peter shocked one of the larger horned males, it turned and rammed him, knocking him to the ground. After Peter was driven to the ground, the animal continued butting him, striking Peter quite a few times in the head and upper body. The attack left Peter with a serious concussion and broken bones.
Peter went to the local hospital emergency room (ER), where his broken bones were set. Even though Peter mentioned having a headache, the ER doctor and nurses didn't examine him for concussion or other head injury. Peter failed to report to them that the animal had directly struck his head. Later that day, Peter suffered a cerebral hemorrhage (bleeding in the brain), with paralysis in his upper limbs.
1. What tort causes of action, if any, can Peter reasonably assert against David? Discuss.
2. What defenses, if any, can David reasonably raise? Discuss.
3. What damages, if any, will Peter be able to obtain against David? Discuss.
?
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER A
1. Peter vs. David Strict Liability
Strict Liability for wild animals or domesticated animals with known dangerous propensities arises when damages or injuries are caused by either wild animals or domesticated animals. Strict liability is liability without fault. As long as plaintiff can show causation and damages resulting from actions of above referenced animals and the damages caused resulted from the nature which makes such animals dangerous, plaintiffs are entitled to recover.
Here, David owned a herd of dairy animals. Although goats are domestic animals, they were cross-bred with a wild breed of sheep. In addition, they have the aggressive character of bighorn sheep, which is known to the owner. Peter was driven to the ground by one of the larger horned males which escaped the farm. The animal rammed Peter, knocking him to the ground and butted him. Animal acted based on its nature and known dangerous propensities making David strictly liable for Peter's injuries. Peter sustained a concussion and broken bones, which are foreseeable outcomes of being rammed by a wild bighorn sheep.
David will be strictly liable for injuries sustained by Peter.
Negligence
In order to prevail in a negligence action, Plaintiff must show that defendant owed him/her a duty of care, said duty was breached, damages were sustained and said damages were caused by Defendant's breach.
?
Duty
David owed a duty of care of a reasonably prudent person to avoid subjecting others to unreasonable risk of harm. Owning cross-bred animals, the standard of care would be to exercise care to ensure securing the animals. This would include inspection and maintenance of the lock of the gate and fences. Although he conducted semi-annual inspection of the fencing of his land, he failed to examine the gate support. David owed a duty to all foreseeable plaintiffs. Under Palsgraf case, the majority Cardozo view imposed duty on all plaintiffs within the zone of danger. Peter was a next- door neighbor and was therefore within the zone of danger under Cardozo view. Under Andrews view, which was the minority view, the duty of care is owed to everyone.
David owed a duty of care to Peter. Breach of Duty
Breach occurs when defendant's act falls below the standard of care established. Here, the standard of care was that of a reasonably prudent farmer, one that would exercise care to keep his animals within his farm. His duty included securing the lock of the gate which, as facts stipulate, David failed to do.
David breached his duty to Peter by failure to examine the gate.
Actual cause- "But-for"
David's breach was the actual cause of Peter's injuries since but for David's failure to examine the gate and secure it, keeping the animals within the farm, Peter would not be injured by the bighorn sheep. David was also a substantial factor for Peter's injuries sustained by ER doctor's failure to examine for concussion.
Therefore, David was the actual cause of Peter's injuries.
????
Proximate Cause
David's failure to examine the gate was the proximate cause of Peter's injuries. Proximate cause has to pass the foreseeability test. It was foreseeable that had the gate lock failed to be secured or properly supported, the animals would escape and injure someone. David was also the proximate cause of injuries sustained by ER doctor's failure to examine as it was a natural and foreseeable consequence, since he created the peril. Although the ER's failure to examine was an intervening cause, it was foreseeable and both tortfeasors contributed to Peter's injuries.
David was the proximate cause of Peter's injuries.
Damages
Peter sustained head injury, concussion and broken bones. He will recover both for pain and suffering and for medical bills incurred.
Trespass to Land
Interference and physical intrusion upon another's land without consent.
Here, David's sheep entered Peter's land without permission. He was in charge of them.
Peter will be able to recover for damages to his land.
Joint Tortfeasors.
Both David and hospital staff contributed to final damages sustained by Peter. They were substantial factors causing Peter's damages. Since they are jointly and severally
??
liable, Peter can recover from both or either the full amount of damages and the tortfeasors may sue each other for contribution or indemnification.
2. David's Defenses
Assumption of Risk
Assumption of risk defense can be raised when Plaintiff knew and appreciated the risk of harm involved and exposed himself/herself to said risk.
Here, David may argue that Peter assumed risk of getting injured and rammed by animals, when he attempted to herd the animals back onto David's land. He used an electric cattle prod which provoked and aggravated sheep. However, this defense will fail because Peter was not aware of the cross-breeding and did not know the sheep had dangerous propensities.
Contributory Negligence
Under tort law, contributory negligence defense may be raised when Plaintiff's own actions contribute to his/her injuries. In some jurisdictions, it can be a complete bar to recovery.
Here, David may assert that Peter contributed to his own injuries by provoking animals with an electric prod and further contributed to his cerebral hemorrhage and paralysis by failure to report to ER doctors and hospital of head injury. However, this defense will fail because Peter was not a doctor and being under hospital care, he was expected to be examined properly. As for provoking, he acted as a reasonable person would in Peter's position in attempting to herd animals back to David.
This defense will fail.
?
Comparative Negligence
Under comparative negligence, if Peter is found to have contributed to his own injuries, the damages will be apportioned based on fault.
David will argue that by provoking animals and failure to report to hospital of head injury, Peter contributed to his own injuries. This defense will fail, however, even if a small percentage of fault is placed on Peter, his damages will be reduced by said amount.
3. Peter's Damages against David
Special Damages
Special damages include medical bills, loss of earnings, loss of earning capacity.
Peter incurred hospital bills and due to his paralysis has likely lost earning capacity.
Peter will be able to recover said damages.
General Damages
Pain and suffering, loss of enjoyment can be recovered.
Peter sustained pain and suffering when sheep rammed and for further injuries sustained at the hospital.
He will be able to recover for general damages which will also include loss of ability to enjoy ordinary daily living activities due to his paralysis.
?
QUESTION 3: SELECTED ANSWER B
TORT LAW/QUESTION #3
What tort causes of action if any can Peter reasonably assert against David? Discuss.
Peter v. David
Strict Liability
Under strict liability theory, liability is imposed without fault.
Strict liability attaches to cause of action from possession of domestic and wild animals, or ultrahazardous/abnormally dangerous activities on one's land.
Here, strict liability will attach to an owner, David, who has a herd of dairy animals which the owner uses to produce and sell milk for commercial purposes.
The owner or possessor of trespassing animals is strictly liable for any damage caused to person or property. The damage must result from the dangerous propensity of the animal(s), that make the animals wild or dangerous in the first place.
Trespassing animals
The owner or possessor of a herd of domestic animals is strictly liable in tort for trespass for any damage caused by such animal, to property and person.
David will be liable for any damage caused by his trespassing animals.

Wild Animals
Here, David owns a breed of herd of cross-breeding domestic goats and a wild breed of sheep. They have the appearance and size of large goats, but have the much more aggressive character of bighorn sheep. In fact, according to the facts of the case, the males have large curved horns similar to those of the bighorn and become aggressive when agitated.
David as an owner or breeder will know the dangerous propensity of these animals and will be strictly liable for any damage from their dangerous propensity.
Here, the facts indicate these were cross-bred animals with dangerous propensity, namely that of a bighorn sheep with large curved horns who become aggressive when agitated.
Peter, David's next-door neighbor, found most of the animals on his land and attempted to herd the animals back to David's land. One of the animals became agitated when prodded with an electric cattle prod and turned and rammed Peter, knocking him to the ground. Afterwards, the animal continued to butt him, striking Peter quite a few times in the head and upper body. Peter was left with a serious concussion and broken bones.
David will argue that he behaved reasonably under the circumstances, but regardless, given the natural propensity of this particular breed, David is strictly liable for injuries he suffered by the animals butting him with large curved horns.
David may argue assumption of risk by Peter, but he is likely to be held liable for his animals goring him to his injury.
David is likely to be strictly liable for David's physical and property injury by his animals.

Negligence
Peter may have a cause of action for Negligence, if Peter can establish that David owed him a duty, and David breached that duty, and the breach of which inflicted injury, both actually and proximately caused by his breach, resulting in physical injury.
Duty
Duty is created when a defendant does an act which foreseeably causes an unreasonable risk of harm to others. The question arises whether the defendant exercised reasonable care once that duty arose.
Standard of Care/General duty
The standard of care used to determine general duty of care is one exercised by a reasonable person of ordinary prudence under the same or similar circumstances.
Here, David owed a duty of due care to keep his herd of cross-bred and potentially dangerous animals in a safe place and manner.
One of the locks on a gate into the pen that held 40 of his animals was beginning to pull free from the wooden support post to which the lock was attached. Notably, a close inspection would have revealed that the wood was rotting around the screws that attached the lock the 10-year-old post.. Unfortunately, David failed to examine the gate support post when he performed his regular semi-annual inspection of the fencing on his land.
Thus, David owned a duty of due care to inspect, detect, and correct the gate that held 40 potentially dangerous animals.

Special Duty
Special duty of care may arise when a landowner-occupier is involved.
Here, David as an occupier of land, next door to his neighbor Peter, may owe a special duty of due care not to cause unreasonable risk of harm.
Peter was his next-door neighbor and his land abutted his and was at risk for unreasonable risk of harm if David failed to inspect, detect and correct any malfunction on his land that may ultimately cause damage to his neighbor's property or person.
David may have failed as an owner or occupier of land in his duty of due care to outsiders, in close proximity to his land, that may get injured.
Breach of Duty
Breach of duty arises when the person fails to exercise due care under the circumstances as a reasonably prudent person under the same or similar circumstances.
Here, the damage is clear and the facts show Peter was injured by David's failure to act as a reasonable rancher in securing his animals safely.
One of the locks on a gate into a pen that held 40 of his animals was beginning to pull free from the wooden support post to which the lock was attached. Notably, a close inspection would have revealed that the wood was rotting around the screws that attached the lock the 10-year-old post. Unfortunately, David failed to examine the gate support post when he performed his regular semi-annual inspection of the fencing on his land.

A reasonable owner or possessor of a herd of animals would have secured it properly and David failed to do so. The risk of harm far outweighed the utility of not fixing the gate, in light of the facts of this case, where Peter suffered a grave injury.
Causation
Actual
But for David's negligence in not securing the gate holding 40 potentially dangerous animals, Peter would not have been gored and butted and injured.
In addition, there was a subsequent act, namely the negligence of the emergency room not to stabilize Peter for concussion, that acted upon the injury actually caused by David.
Proximate
Proximate cause refers to the legal liability of David as to whether he is directly liable for Peter's injuries, without any supervening acts.
Here, David was the proximate cause of David's injuries as he was the direct cause of his injuries, and responsible for any foreseeable damage, and injury.
However, the emergency room team failed to check and stabilize Peter for his concussion, resulting in cerebral hemorrhage and paralysis in his upper limbs. This failure was an intervening act that acted upon Peter's injuries.
Notably, rescue or emergency acts aggravating a pre-existing injury are foreseeable and dependent causes, and do not cut David's legal responsibility in Peter's injuries.
Thus, both David and the Emergency room are the proximate cause of Peter's injuries.

Damages
Damages are those that are foreseeable results of a negligent injury of another.
Here, as a result of David's negligence, Peter suffered a serious concussion, broken bones, and ultimately cerebral hemorrhage. The injuries were exacerbated by the negligence of the Emergency room staff.
Joint Tortfeasors
When two or more actors jointly cause an indivisible injury they are both jointly and severally liable for the injury.
Here, The ER and David together are jointly and severally liable for Peter's injury, one indivisible injury.
Peter or his estate can sue both David and/or ER for his injury.
Contribution
David can seek contribution from ER for their share.
What defenses if any can David reasonably raise? Discuss.
Comparative Negligence
Under comparative theory, the damages are assigned according to the blameworthiness of each tortfeasor and share is allocated accordingly.
Here, David may assert Peter's comparative negligence as a defense.

He is unlikely to succeed as Peter may have acted reasonably under the circumstances.
Assumption of Risk
When one party knowingly, consciously and willfully confronts a risk, he will be deemed to have assumed the risk.
Here, David may argue that Peter knew and understood that these animals were dangerous and proceeded to herd them and in fact used an electric cattle prod and agitated the animals and causing them to attack.
David may not succeed in this defense if Peter acted reasonably under the circumstances.
Contributory Negligence
If a Plaintiff falls short in his own protection by failing to act as a reasonable and prudent man he may be contributorily negligent.
Here, David will argue that Peter used an electric cattle prod and exercised less than due care in his defense and contributed to his own injuries.
David is unlikely to use this defense if Peter acted reasonably under the circumstances.
In addition, David may not use this defense for his strict liability under strict liability case as discussed above.
What damages, if any, will Peter be able to obtain against David? Remedies

Monetary
Monetary damages are those that flow from the injury and are relatively certain and not remote and ascertainable.
General
General damages refer to pain and suffering (past, present and future) that Peter will endure and are compensable.
Special
Special damages are pecuniary damages in the form of medical bills, lost wages, profits, that Peter will suffer. He will be compensated for his medical bills and future bills, reduced to present value.
Equitable
Injunction
Peter or his estate may seek injunction against David to stop the milk farm to continue as it presents a dangerous activity.

QUESTION 4
Jack, a retiree, plans to build a new home on his vacant property. He decided to use a particular product called "Austin Brown Stone" for the exterior walls, and estimated he would need about 100 tons of stone.
Jack drafted a contract to present to Stone-Co, a local stone distributor, in which Jack agreed: (i) to buy all the Austin Brown Stone he needs to build the exterior walls of his house, (ii) at a price of $200 per ton, (iii) to be delivered to his property in 5-ton lots within 10 days following each request for 5 tons, (iv) to be paid for upon delivery. To ensure timely deliveries, Jack included a liquidated damages clause which provided that Stone-Co would pay $5,000 per day for each day that any requested delivery is late.
Jack signed and dropped off the contract to Stone-Co for its review and signature. That evening, the Stone-Co salesperson, knowing that Austin Brown Stone is often not easily obtained, wrote the following just below Jack's liquidated damages clause: "Notwithstanding the foregoing, if Stone-Co has difficulty getting Austin Brown Stone, Stone-Co may substitute Austin White Stone."
The Stone-Co salesperson then signed the contract and returned it to Jack the next day. Jack did not read the modified contract or see the term added by Stone-Co.
One week later, Jack made a request for the first 5 tons of Austin Brown Stone, and Stone-Co started looking for a supplier. Stone-Co quickly discovered that Austin Brown Stone was not available in the United States. Although it could be imported from Canada, importing it would add $25 per ton to Stone-Co's expenses and reduce its profit margin.
Ten days after Jack's order, Stone-Co delivered Austin White Stone with a note stating that Austin Brown Stone was not available in the U.S., and a demand for payment at the new price of $225 per ton. Jack immediately called the Stone-Co salesperson, stating he would not accept the substitution because Austin White Stone is a completely different product.
Jack contracted with another supplier for Austin Brown Stone at $225 per ton. Jack thereafter filed a lawsuit against Stone-Co seeking damages for breach of contract and liquidated damages.
1. What is Jack's likelihood of success in his lawsuit and what damages, if any, would he be entitled to? Discuss.
2. What defenses, if any, can Stone-Co reasonably assert? Discuss.
?
QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER A
1. Jack v. Stone-Co
Applicable law
For sale of goods, the applicable law is the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), as opposed to other contracts, which are subject to the common law.
Here, the contract is for supply of stones, so this is sale of goods and the applicable law is therefore the UCC.
Contract?
To have a valid contract, the following elements must be met:
- willingness to be bound by a legally enforceable contract by both parties, - mutual assent (usually in the form of offer and acceptance),
- consideration.
Here, both parties (Jack and Stone-Co) intended to enter into a binding contract, so the willingness to be bound element is satisfied.
Offer
An offer is an expression of willingness to contract under certain terms, made with the intention that it shall become binding as soon as it is accepted by the person to whom it is addressed.
??????????
Here, the contract Jack left at the Stone-Co office contained all material terms of his offer, including price, quantity and time for delivery.
This was obviously an offer capable of acceptance by Stone-Co.
Acceptance
At common law, acceptance is a final and unqualified expression of assent to the terms of an offer.
Under the UCC, the mirror image rule, by which the expression of assent must be unqualified, has been modified and the terms agreed to depend on the status of the parties (i.e. whether both parties are merchants or not).
Where at least one party is not a merchant, if acceptance varies or adds a term to the offer, acceptance is nonetheless still valid and the added or varied term is considered as a mere offer to vary or add the term.
Here, Jack was not acting as a merchant (he is not in the trade of stones and, even though he apparently knows pretty well how to draft contracts, he did not claim himself to be a merchant or particularly knowledgeable about the trade of stones).
Therefore, the terms of the contract were those of the original offer he made, unless he expressly agreed to the added term Stone-Co's salesman had put in the contract, and the acceptance is still valid (under UCC rules), because Stone-Co did not explicitly limit its acceptance by requesting that Jack accepts himself the additional term about the Austin White Stone.
So, the mutual assent element is satisfied, with the terms of the original offer (made by Jack) as the terms of the contract (and Stone-Co's additional term being a mere
?????????
proposal to add the term to the contract and which, under these circumstances, has not been accepted by Jack and is not part of the contract).
Consideration
Consideration is satisfied where the contract is the result of a bargained-for agreement and each party suffered legal benefit or detriment.
Usually, quantity is required for a valid consideration to be found in a contract but requirements and output contracts are considered valid and satisfy the consideration requirement.
Here, the contract is a requirements contract (all stone that Jack will need for building his house) and, even though it states no particular quantity, there is valid consideration (Jack to pay the price, Stone-Co to provide the stones).
Therefore, consideration is satisfied for this contract and there is a valid, enforceable contract between Jack and Stone-Co.
Liquidated damages clause
To be valid, a liquidated damages clause must reflect the damages, which would have been reasonably anticipated by the parties at the time they entered into the contract. An unreasonable amount would be deemed a penalty clause and would not be enforceable by the court.
Here, the liquidated damages clause mentions that Stone-Co will be liable to Jack for $5,000 for each day of delay in delivering the stones for each order delayed. This represents a substantial amount compared to the price of the contract: each delivery must be of 5 tons, at $200 per ton, i.e., each delivery is $1,000. The liquidated
???????????
damages clause therefore represents 5 times the price of the goods to be delivered for each day of delay!
And Jack's estimation of needs is 100 tons of stone, i.e., about $20,000 for the whole contract.
A four day delay would result in Stone-Co's liability for the estimated price of the whole contract, which is apparently totally unreasonable.
The only justification would be if the delay in delivering the stones could result in Jack having a substantial loss of earning, revenue or another form of liability himself. As he is building his own house, he would not be liable to a client or another contractor for the delay in performing the job.
However, he might have other contractors charge him for the day without stone, but $5,000 is unlikely to be a reasonable amount on these facts (unless wages are huge in Jack's area...) and the clause would be considered a penalty clause, therefore not enforceable by the court.
Damages
On these facts, the liquidated damages clause would be considered as a penalty clause and would not be enforceable by the court, so Jack could not recover the $5,000 per day for each day of late delivery.
However, he could recover the damages suffered by the breach of contract by Stone- Co, i.e., the additional $25 he would have to pay for each ton of stones required for building his house.

2. Stone-Co's defenses
Impracticability
Where performance of a contract becomes impossible because of circumstances not caused by either party (but outside their control), performance is excused.
Under modern common law, if performance becomes substantially more difficult, so as to affect the nature of performance, the same rule can apply (impracticability instead of impossibility).
Here, Stone-Co could try to rely on the defense of impracticability to explain that they were unable to provide Austin Brown Stone to Jack, because this type of stone was not available on the US market.
However, this is unlikely to be a valid defense on the facts, as Jack obtained the Austin Brown Stone from another supplier, and it seems not to have been so difficult or impossible to obtain the stones in question in the US. It must have been merely more expensive, and a bad bargain is never an excuse for breach of contract, so Stone-Co is unlikely to prevail with this defense.
Lack of consideration
C.f. supra for definition of consideration.
Here, as stated above, requirements contracts are valid contracts, so Stone-Co could not rely on the lack of consideration to try to avoid liability under this contract.
??????
Applicable Law
QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER B
?The UCC applies to the sale of goods; tangible, movable items at the time of sale. The common law applies to all other transactions.
Here, we are dealing with the purchase of stone, to build a wall. The stone is tangible and movable; therefore it is a good.
The UCC laws will apply.
Merchants
A merchant under the UCC is someone who holds himself out to have special knowledge or skill particular to the goods of the sale, or regular deals with the goods of the kind.
Here, Jack is a retiree and plans on building a new home on his vacant property. There are no facts to show that Jack has any special knowledge or skill related to the Austin Brown Stone, or that he regularly deals with the home. It is likely he is purchasing the stone for this one period in time, to build himself a home.
Stone-Co, is a local stone distributor, they sell stones, and regularly deals with stones in their business.
Jack will not be considered a merchant under the UCC, but Stone-Co is a merchant.
Valid Contract
A valid contract consists of mutual assent through offer and acceptance, consideration, and no defenses to formation.
??
Offer
An offer is an objective manifestation of intent to be bound, given with specific and definite terms, to an identified offeree.
Here, Jack has drafted a contract to present to Stone-Co, which contained the following terms:
subject matter: Austin Brown Stone
price: $200 per ton, paid for upon delivery
delivery: delivered to his home in 5 ton lots within 10 days following each request for 5 tons.
quantity: all the stone needed to build the exterior walls of his home.
His offer is certain and definite in its terms, and a reasonable person would think that Jack intended to enter into a contract and create the power of acceptance in Stone-Co. Furthermore, he signed and dropped off the contract to Stone-Co, so he communicated his intent to enter into a contract.
Jack has made a valid offer.
Requirements Contract
Under the UCC, a party can agree to purchase all goods required for their needs, and the other party may agree to supply all of the goods required. This is called a requirements contract.
Typically, a contract for goods must include quantity; however, in a requirements contract, all that is needed is the good faith promise that the purchaser will purchase all that is required for their needs. This contract will not be found to be illusory and lack of definiteness because both parties are to act in good faith.
Jack will be bound by the requirements contract to act in good faith.
??
Acceptance
An acceptance is an objective manifestation of unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer, communicated in a proper manner and time. Under common law, acceptance must be the "mirror image" of the terms of the offer; however, under the UCC, acceptance can be given in any reasonable manner.
The next day, Stone-Co's salesperson signed the contract and returned it to Jack the next day after adding a term. Since her contract had an additional term, it would have been a counteroffer under common law but the UCC allows for acceptance in any reasonable manner. Since the contract was not worded so that acceptance was conditional on the additional term but rather, it stated that "notwithstanding the foregoing", it is still a valid acceptance.
Therefore, Stone-Co has accepted Jack's offer.
Consideration
Consideration is a bargained-for exchange, whereby both parties incur a new legal detriment.
Here, Jack's promise to pay for all required stones induced Stone-Co's promise to deliver all required stones. Both parties have incurred new legal detriment.
Valid consideration exists.
Additional Terms under UCC
Between merchants, additional terms will be automatically added to the contract unless the contract limits it, the term materially alters the contract, or the other party rejects within 10 days. Between a merchant and a non-merchant, additional terms will be considered proposals to the contract and will not automatically be added to the contract.
???
Here, Jack did not read the modified contract, or see the term added by Stone-Co. Therefore, the proposal of the additional terms have not been added to the contract since Jack did not assent to the terms.
Jack and Stone-Co have a requirements contract for Austin Brown Stone.
Modification
A modification under common law required mutual assent and consideration. A modification to a UCC contract does not require consideration, only mutual assent and good faith.
10 days after Jack's order, Stone-Co attempts to modify the contract because Austin Brown Stone is not available in the United States and importing it would incur additional costs. Stone-Co's request for modification was in good faith; however, Jack did not assent to the terms because Austin White Stone is a completely different stone.
There has not been a valid modification.
Breach
Breach is the failure to perform one's duties under contract.
All contracts can be substantially performed, unless there is a term that is expressly stated in the contract. Furthermore, sale of goods under the UCC require "Perfect Tender", and must be exactly as ordered.
Here, the contract between Jack and Stone-Co expressly states that the 5-ton lots must be delivered to his home within 10 days following each request for 5 tons. Jack made his first request for stones one week after contracting. 10 days later, Stone-Co failed to deliver the required stones, but rather notified Jack that the stones weren't available in the United States and that he would have to pay additional fees if he wanted them imported from Canada.
??
Furthermore, instead of sending Austin Brown Stone, they delivered Austin White Stone. As discussed above, Stone-Co's request to allow substitution for Austin White Stone was not added into the contract; therefore Stone-Co breached by sending nonconforming goods.
Stone-Co has not perfectly tendered the goods required by Jack and failed to deliver Austin Brown Stone within 10 days of Jack's request.
Stone-Co has breached the contract.
Anticipatory Breach
Where a party has unequivocally expressed his inability to perform under contract, the other party may sue immediately, or wait for performance to be due, then sue.
Here, on the 10th day after requesting delivery, Stone-Co has sent non-conforming stones and called Jack and expressed the difficulties in getting Austin Brown Stone, and requested a higher payment to get it to him. They have unequivocally expressed their inability and unwillingness to perform their duties under contract for further deliveries of the required stones, which is to deliver Austin Brown Stone at $200 per ton.
Stone-Co has anticipatorily breached the rest of the contract, and Jack may sue immediately.
Damages
Liquidated Damages
Liquidated damages are valid when damages are unforeseeable at the time of contracting, are reasonable in amount, and not a penalty.
Here, Jack would likely incur damages for the late delivery of stone because he would lose time; however liquidated damages amount at $5000/day is likely to be deemed a
??
punishment. It is unreasonable in amount, and furthermore, the damages that Jack would incur are likely to be foreseeable.
Jack will not be able to recover the liquidated damages, and will have to look to Expectation Damages.
Expectation Damages
The non-breaching party is entitled to what their expected benefits are under contract.
Here, Stone-Co has breached the contract and Jack will be entitled to expectation damages. Jack expected to purchase about 100 tons of stone at $200 per ton, which comes out to roughly $20,000. He ended up contracting with another supplier for $225 per ton, an extra $25 per ton, which is roughly an additional $2,500 more than he expected to pay. Jack will be entitled to recover from Stone-Co $25 for every ton he needed to build his wall.
Furthermore, he will be entitled to any incidental costs related to the breach, and any reliance damages which were incurred as a result of his reliance on the contract.
2. What defenses, if any, can Stone-Co reasonably assert?
Impossibility
A contract is deemed impossible when unforeseen at the time of contracting and objectively speaking, no other person could possibly perform the contract.
Here, Stone-Co will assert that the contract was impossible to satisfy because the stone was not available in the United States. However, since Stone-Co is able to import the stone from Canada at an additional cost, and Jack found another supplier who was able to supply him with the stone, the contract will not be Impossible.
??
Impracticability
A contract because impracticable when unforeseen at the time of contracting, the contract becomes impracticable to perform.
Here, Stone-Co will claim impracticability because of the added costs of importing the goods from Canada, which would cut into their profit margin. Increased costs will be deemed to make a contract impracticable, only if it is a substantial increase to the cost. Here, the extra costs of importing the rock adds $25 per ton of rock. It is not substantially increased and rather small, especially because it seems that it would not take away Stone-Co's entire profit, but rather merely reduce the profit margin. To void a contract due to increased costs, the cost would have to be at least 10 times the expected cost, and cause substantial hardship to Stone-Co. We do not have this situation here.
Furthermore, the stones were not available at the time of contracting, and had Stone-Co done their due diligence, they would have figured that out; but instead, they agreed to the contract without checking, then failed to perform.
The contract will not be deemed impracticable. Stone-Co has no valid defenses.
?

1. Torts
2. Contracts
3. Not Included 
4. Torts

QUESTION 1
Tenant rents space in a Cityville office building from Landlord. Six months ago, a fire broke out at night in the office building and Tenant, who was working late, was overcome by smoke in the building.
A responding firefighter found Tenant unconscious and, while carrying Tenant out of the building, dropped him, breaking Tenant's leg. The building and all its contents were destroyed.
Cityville fire marshal's investigative report stated: "Fire apparently originated in basement. Apparent cause: faulty wiring. Accumulation of old newspapers in basement was a principal source of fuel, and probably resulted in rapid spread of fire to remainder of building."
The old newspapers mentioned in the fire marshal's report had been left by a previous tenant three years ago. Some of the basement hallways were nearly impassable. Landlord was aware of this, but hadn't gotten around to cleaning them up.
One of Cityville's fire safety ordinances provides: "Any person who permits any article to remain in a stairway or hallway so as to impede entering or leaving the building, or any area within it, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars."
1. On what theory or theories might Tenant reasonably sue Landlord? Discuss.
2. What types of damages, if any, might Tenant recover from Landlord? Discuss.


QUESTION 2
Sara is a doctor who collects, buys, sells, and trades baseball cards for profit, averaging 15 transactions a week. She is a recognized expert in the 1939-50 era.
Bill operates a store that regularly sells baseball cards. Bill claims he phoned Sara and offered to buy a 1939 Denny Wilson card for $550, and that Sara accepted.
Immediately after their phone conversation, Bill sent Sara an unsigned, typed letter confirming the contract, and identifying the parties, the Denny Wilson card and the price. Bill's letter had a letterhead identifying the name of his business, Beyer's Baseball Cards and Collectibles. The letter included the following term: "Seller shall provide a certificate of authenticity from the Baseball Trading Cards Association." Certificates of authenticity cost $100 and significantly increase a card's value. Sara's card was not certified, and the parties had not discussed this before.
Sara received and read the letter but did not respond to it. When Bill called later, Sara said she had sold the card to another party for $575. Bill sued Sara for breach of contract, seeking $250 in damages (based on $800 as the fair market value of a certified card).
Sara denies the existence of a contract, alleging that Bill only asked, "Would you consider taking $550" for the card, and that she replied, "Okay, send me something in writing." Alternatively, she claims that the phone agreement was unenforceable and that the so-called letter of confirmation had no legal effect. She also contests Bill's calculation of damages.
1. Can Bill prevail in his lawsuit? Discuss.
2. If so, what damages, if any, is Bill entitled to recover? Discuss.


QUESTION 4
Cindy and Shelly Smith, 35-year-old identical twins, look exactly alike.
Cindy was a straight-A student in high school, went to college, and then to law school. She is presently campaigning for election to the State Senate.
Shelly got into the wrong crowd in high school, became addicted to cocaine, and moved to Europe without graduating from high school.
Cindy and Shelly have not spoken for years, and very few people know that Cindy has a twin.
Debbie, a high school classmate of Cindy and Shelly, dislikes Cindy and does not want Cindy to win her election. Debbie obtained an old photograph of Shelly snorting a line of cocaine and sent it to Newspaper the day before the election, with an anonymous note that read, "Ms. Smith is a cokehead." The photograph was very clear and looked exactly like Cindy.
Newspaper, unaware that Cindy had an identical twin sister, published the photograph of Shelly the same day, with a caption that read, "Cokehead for State Senate?" Newspaper reported that it had received the photograph of "Cindy Smith" anonymously earlier that day. Cindy was very distressed about Newspaper's publication and subsequently lost the election.
Thereafter, Cindy filed defamation claims against both Debbie and Newspaper.
1. What is the likely outcome of Cindy's defamation claim against Debbie? Discuss.
2. What is the likely outcome of Cindy's defamation claim against Newspaper? Discuss.



Question 1 Solution

QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER A 1. Tenant v. Landlord
Negligence
Tenant will likely sue landlord on the basis of negligence. An action for negligence will lie if the defendant (D) owed a duty of due care to the plaintiff (P), D breached that duty, D's breach was the actual and proximate cause of P's damages, and P suffered actual damages.
Duty - Lessor of Land
A lessor of land has a duty of due care to warn or make safe dangers of which it should reasonably know in common areas of the property.
The fire originated in the basement, which is presumably a common area of the building, and so the landlord had a duty to warn of or make safe any latent dangers. In addition, since the building was an "office building," presumably the wiring is shared among various tenants and is therefore also a common aspect of the building, particularly since the place it failed was in the basement.
Since tenant as a lessee has a right to occupy the building, he is within the foreseeable zone of danger of a fire in the building, and so is considered a foreseeable plaintiff under both the majority Cardozo test (specific P must be foreseeable), as well as the Andrews test (if duty is owed to anyone, a duty is owed to the P).
Landlord owed a duty of due care to keep the common areas of the building safe.
?????
Duty - General
Everyone owes a duty to act reasonably so as not to expose others to an unreasonable risk of harm. Modernly, land owner/occupier duties are being replaced in many areas with a general duty standard.
Under the general duty, Landlord owed a duty to act reasonably to prevent undue risk of harm to those occupying the building.
Breach
The P must show that the D's level of care fell below the reasonable standard required by his duty. This requires showing what happened, and a showing that the D's conduct was unreasonable.
Tenant will argue that Landlord breached his duty in two ways. First, he did not maintain the wiring in the building in a safe condition. Lessors should reasonably inspect the property for such dangers. The fact that the wiring was so faulty that it sparked a fire demonstrates that maintenance had not been kept up. Second, Landlord left an extreme amount of highly-flammable newspapers in the hallway, and he was aware of this. Even had the wiring not been faulty, any type of flame could have lit the newspapers resulting in a catastrophic fire such as that that occurred.
Whether the conduct was unreasonable may be determined by the Learned Hand Formula. In this test, the utility of the D's conduct as well as the burden it would place of the D to reduce the risk of harm must be weighed with the magnitude of the danger and the probability of injury.
Here, it would be a relatively minor burden to remove the newspapers and properly upkeep the wiring system. All buildings require electricity, so this is a burden all owners of buildings share. The risk is grave - a fire causes an extreme risk of death and injury,
????
in addition to property damage. It appears the risk far outweighs the burden of making the building safe by repairing the wiring and removing the newspapers.
Landlord may argue that he was unaware of the faulty wiring, and that he is not responsible for the newspapers since they were left by a prior tenant. However, in this case, Landlord had a duty to do a reasonable inspection for such dangers in common areas, and he breached this duty.
Negligence Per Se - Violation of Statute
Another way to prove duty and breach is to show that a D violated a criminal statute. The P must show that the legislature intended the statute to protect safety, that the P was in the class of persons whom the statute was intended to protect, and that the injury was of the type the statute was intended to prevent.
Here, the cited statute does appear to be intended to protect safety since blocking the entry or exit to a building would impede anyone trying to escape in a dangerous situation or to rescue those in the building.
Tenant, as a foreseeable occupier of the building, is one who the statute is intended to protect in the event of an emergency because she may need to escape or be rescued.
However, the type of injury does not appear to coincide with the statute's intent. The papers that were blocking the hallway were in the basement, and no facts indicate that they blocked anyone from exiting or entering the building. The injury was caused by a fire, not by being trapped.
Tenant will not succeed on a negligence per se argument for breach; however, the general duty does apply.
?
Actual Cause
Tenant will argue that but for the Landlord's failure to maintain the wiring, as well as his negligence in leaving a source of readily flammable fuel to feed the fire, the building would not have burned and Tenant would not have suffered damages.
Landlord will argue that the fire marshal qualifies the report with the word "probably resulted" and therefore, actual cause cannot be established.
It is highly likely that Landlord's negligence led to the resulting fire and damages to Tenant, however, Tenant may require additional evidence if the court finds the report inadequate proof due the qualifying language.
Proximate Cause - Smoke Inhalation
A D will be held liable if his act directly caused a foreseeable result.
Assuming that actual cause has been established, Landlord's negligence was a direct cause of the fire starting. The wiring ignited the fire, directly leading to the newspapers burning, and resulting in "rapid spread to the remainder of the building." There were no intervening forces, and a fire was very foreseeable, given that both a source of fire and the fuel for that fire were present, and Landlord was negligently responsible for both conditions.
Landlord will argue that the fact that a previous tenant left the papers is an intervening force. However, the newspapers were present before the fire happened, and therefore, the fire acted on a "set stage," rather than an intervening force.
Landlord's negligence is the proximate cause of Tenant's direct injuries from the fire - smoke inhalation leading to unconsciousness.
??
Proximate Cause - Broken Leg
An intervening act did occur related to Tenant's broken leg. The firefighter's conduct in dropping Tenant was an intervening force.
The firefighter's conduct will be deemed a dependent intervening force because it was brought about by the Landlord's negligence. Danger invites rescue. The firefighter would not have been present had Landlord's negligence not led to the fire - his presence was foreseeable.
Landlord will argue that the firefighter was negligent in dropping Tenant and therefore he should not be held liable. However, even if the firefighter was negligent, a normal level of negligence during a rescue is also considered foreseeable. Since the firefighter was forced to carry Tenant out of the building to save his life, it is foreseeable that he could get further injured during that act. The firefighter's negligence would have had to rise to an unforeseeable level of blameworthiness for this to be a superseding cause of Tenant's injuries.
Landlord's negligence was therefore also the proximate cause of Tenant's broken leg. Damages
A finding of negligence typically requires actual damages to person or property resulting from the negligent conduct of the D.
Here, Tenant has suffered both unconsciousness due to smoke inhalation, as well as a broken leg. In addition, since the building's contents were destroyed, he presumably also lost any property he had left in the space he was renting.
Tenant has suffered damages sufficient for a claim.
???
Defenses
Defenses to negligence include assumption of the risk, contributory or comparative negligence.
There is no evidence that Tenant consented in any way to Landlord maintaining faulty wiring or newspapers in the basement, nor that Tenant was in any way negligent.
Landlord will have no defenses.
2. Damages
General Damages
General damages directly result from the negligence.
Here, Tenant suffered physical injuries to his person for which he may claim pain and suffering. Although no facts specifically mention emotional damages, the trauma of this experience may also call for such damages.
In addition, the destruction of his property is also directly flowing from the negligence, and he will be entitled to compensation.
Special/Consequential Damages
Special damages are costs that occur as a consequence of the P's injuries.
Tenant will have medical costs for treating his leg and smoke inhalation. He may also miss work or lose profits if he has a business.
Therefore, Tenant likely also has a claim for special damages.
????
QUESTION 1: SELECTED ANSWER B
TENANT v. LANDLORD
NEGLIGENCE
Negligence is the failure to conform to a duty of care of a reasonable person in similar circumstances. The elements of negligence are the existence of a duty of reasonable care; breach of that duty; actual and proximate causation; and damages.
DOES LANDLORD OWE TENANT A DUTY OF CARE?
In general, one person does not owe another a duty of care. However, there are certain circumstances that give rise to a duty of reasonable care. Where there is a special relationship between the parties, a duty of care will be established. One of these special relationships is that of landlord and tenant, wherein a landlord will owe his tenant a duty of care to act as a reasonable landlord and ensure that the subject premises are safe and suitable for habitation.
Here, Landlord is a landlord, and Tenant is his tenant, renting space in the office building, so Landlord owes Tenant a duty of care to ensure that the office building in Cityville is safe and suitable for his purposes.
IS TENANT AN INVITEE?
A landowner owes invitees on his land a duty of care to inspect the land for any knowable hidden dangerous conditions, and to warn and/or make safe the land where these conditions are not patent. An invitee is one who is on the land for any commercial purpose, or where the land is open to the public.
????
Here, Tenant is on the land -- i.e., the office building -- for a commercial purpose. Tenant is there to operate his business from Landlord's building. Landlord is a landowner who has permitted Tenant to be on the land for a commercial purpose. Therefore, Tenant is an invitee.
Therefore, Landlord owes Tenant a duty of care to inspect the building in which Tenant leases space, to discover any hidden, knowable dangerous conditions that are in the building, and to warn or make them safe. Here, those conditions are the faulty wiring and the presence of a large "accumulation of old newspapers in the basement" that became a principal source of fuel for the fire that occurred.
DID LANDLORD BREACH HIS DUTY OF CARE TO TENANT?
A party will breach his duty of care to another if his conduct fails to conform to that of a reasonable person in similar circumstances.
Breach is often established by using the "Learned Hand" analysis, which states that breach will be established where the burden of acting to prevent harm (B) is outweighed by the probability of the harm occurring (P) in light of the gravity of the harm (L). If the burden is lower, then the defendant will have breached his duty of care.
Here, Landlord owed Tenant a duty of care to inspect the building and discover any hidden dangerous conditions and warn of and/or make them safe.
DISCOVERY OF THE NEWSPAPERS
In the office building, Landlord had permitted the basement hallways to become nearly impassable due to the presence of old newspapers left by a previous tenant. The newspapers had been in the basement for at least three years. This amount of newspapers would be easily discoverable -- in fact, obviously patent -- by a landlord who was discharging his duty of care to his tenant by inspecting the premises to
?
determine if there were any dangerous conditions upon his land. Instead, Landlord permitted the newspapers to accumulate and remain unperturbed for at least three years, where they caused a serious hazard, both in terms of flammability and safe passage through the basement hallways.
Landlord could argue that it is not incumbent upon him to check his building on a daily or weekly basis, so theoretically it is possible that he would not have known of the accumulation. However, this is a specious argument. The last tenant -- the one who placed the newspapers there -- had left the building three years ago. Three years is more than enough time to discover their presence, especially when the dangerous condition they posed was so obvious. Further, Landlord knew they were there, "but hadn't gotten around to cleaning them up."
The burden of discovering and removing the newspapers was relatively low. Landlord could have removed them himself over a few days at most. The probability of harm resulting from their presence is moderate to high, given that the newspapers pose a risk of harm from their flammability and from possibly toppling over and harming someone, or preventing ingress or egress from the basement. The gravity of harm is moderate to high, because a fire could result (as it did) and burn the premises, its contents and inhabitants, or the newspapers could topple over and injure someone.
Therefore, Landlord breached his duty of care to Tenant as the burden of removing the newspapers was lower than the risk of harm in light of the gravity of the harm.
DISCOVERY OF THE FAULTY WIRING
Landlord also had a duty of care to inspect, warn of and/or make safe the wiring in his building. If wiring is faulty, it could spark and ignite flammable material.
While there is no indication from the fact pattern that Landlord did not regularly inspect his building for faulty wiring, the fact pattern implies that the presence of the large

amount of newspapers in the basement made the hallways therein "nearly impassable." Given that the faulty wiring would have had to have been close enough to the newspapers in order for a spark to ignite them, it is is very possible that Landlord had not inspected the basement's wiring in three years because he could not access it.
The burden of inspecting the building for faulty wiring and making it safe (warning here is probably not enough) is low to moderate -- moderate only in that Landlord would have had to have removed the newspapers first. However, as discussed supra, the burden of removing the newspapers is quite low. The probability of harm resulting from faulty wiring is moderate to high, given that fires could start from such wiring. The gravity of harm is high, given the presence of a large number of old newspapers, which are easily ignited. Therefore, the burden of inspecting for faulty wiring and making it safe is outweighed by the probability of harm and the gravity of harm.
Landlord could argue that the presence of the newspapers made it very difficult to inspect for the wiring. This is also a specious argument, since it was he who made it difficult to inspect the premises by failing to remove the newspapers. A reasonable landlord would have removed the newspapers for safety reasons.
Therefore, Landlord has breached his duty of care to Tenant by failing to inspect and make safe the wiring in the basement.
NEGLIGENCE PER SE?
Under the doctrine of negligence per se, the breach of a statute may establish a breach of a duty of care if the statute establishes a duty of care, the party harmed by the breach is of the class the statute sought to protect, and the harm that occurred is of the type that the statute sought to prevent.
Here, there is a Cityville fire safety ordinance that provides that "Any person who permits any article to remain in a stairway or hallway so as to impede entering or
?
leaving the building, or any area within it, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars."
Here, Landlord permitted an accumulation of newspapers to exist in the basement hallways of his office building, making the hallways nearly impassable. This condition will "impede entering or leaving the building." Therefore, Landlord has breached the statute.
Further, Tenant is an occupant of the building. The ordinance seeks to protect those inside the building, so that in the case of emergency, it is possible for such people to escape the building easily. Therefore, Tenant is of the class the statute sought to protect.
However, the type of harm the statute sought to prevent was an occupant being trapped in the building because he or she was unable to leave the building. Here, there is no indication that Tenant was in the basement and unable to leave because of the newspapers. Tenant was unable to leave of his own accord because he was unconscious from smoke inhalation. A firefighter was able to remove Tenant from the building (albeit with some clumsiness). The statute did not seek to protect against smoke inhalation or fires.
Tenant could argue that he suffered a broken leg, and the statute was intended to protect against just that kind of harm. However, he did not suffer the broken leg because he was unable to get through the newspapers in the hallways. The broken leg resulted from being dropped on his way out of the building as he was saved. Further, the loss of his contents in the fire was not the type of harm the statute sought to prevent.
Therefore, the type of harm suffered was not the type the statute sought to prevent. Recovery under a theory of negligence per se is not possible. Instead, Tenant will have

established breach of a duty of care under the Learned Hand analysis, as discussed supra.
ACTUAL CAUSATION
Actual causation will be established where the plaintiff would not have suffered harm but for the defendant's failure to conform to a duty of reasonable care in the circumstances.
Here, but for Landlord failing to inspect the building and remove the newspapers and fix the faulty wiring, Tenant would not have suffered a broken leg on his way out of the door, smoke inhalation leading to unconsciousness, or the loss of his contents in the fire.
Therefore, there is actual causation.
PROXIMATE CAUSATION
Proximate causation is established where the plaintiff's harm is the natural and foreseeable consequence of the breach of the defendant's duty of care, without any superseding causes to break the chain of causation.
Here, Tenant suffered smoke inhalation due to a fire caused when a spark from faulty wiring ignited a large amount of old newspapers in the basement. Smoke inhalation is a common consequence where a fire is caused. There is no superseding -- i.e., unforeseeable intervening cause to break the chain of causation. Therefore, there is proximate cause for Tenant's smoke inhalation.
Also, Tenant's chattels were destroyed as a result of the fire, as discussed supra. The burning of a large number of old newspapers can foreseeably result in a conflagration large enough to destroy all the contents of a building. Therefore, there is proximate cause for the loss of Tenant's chattels.
??
Further, Tenant's leg was broken as a result of the firefighter rescuing him and dropping him. Landlord will argue that Tenant being dropped and his leg breaking was an unforeseeable consequence, and therefore the chain of causation was broken. However, negligence of others -- like the firefighter's here -- is always foreseeable. Therefore the chain of causation has not been broken and there is also proximate cause for Tenant's broken leg.
DAMAGES
Tenant may claim for general damages for the pain and suffering he suffered as a result of the fire. He may also claim for special damages for his medical expenses, and for the market value replacement of the chattels he lost in the fire.
DEFENSES
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE
Contributory negligence will bar the recovery of a plaintiff who has in any way contributed to his own harm.
There is no indication that Tenant contributed to his own harm. It was not his duty to inspect, warn or make safe the building.
Therefore, this defense will fail.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE
Where a plaintiff has contributed in some way to his own harm, where a jurisdiction has adopted pure comparative negligence, his recovery will be reduced by the amount he has contributed. Under a modified comparative negligence theory, where adopted, if
????
the plaintiff's contribution to his own harm is less than 50%, he will recover only in the amount to which he has not contributed; if it exceeds that amount, his recovery will be barred.
Tenant did not contribute to his harm, so this defense will fail.
ASSUMPTION OF THE RISK
There is no indication that Tenant knowingly and willingly assumed the risk of being in the building. Therefore this defense will also fail.
Landlord may argue that due to the


Question 2 Solution

QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER A
?Applicable Law - Uniform Commercial Code
Contracts for the sale of goods, which are tangible, movable items will be governed by the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
Here, the contract is for the sale of a <strong>1939 Denny Wilson baseball card</strong> which is a good.
Therefore, UCC applies.
Merchants
Where parties to a contract hold themselves out to be experts or as having specialized knowledge in the area of which the contract pertains the parties will be seen as merchants and held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing and the sections of the UCC pertaining specifically to Merchants will apply.
Here, Sara is a doctor who collects, buys, sells and trades baseball cards for a profit averaging 15 transactions a week and is a recognized expert in the 1939-50 era. Typically, collectors will not be seen as merchants especially when they make their living by other means, as evidenced here in that Sara is a doctor, but Sara's recognition of being an "expert in the 1939-50 era" along with her frequency of transactions, 15 transactions a week will likely place her in the eyes of the court as a merchant since a typical collector, non-merchant, would not be recognized as an expert nor would they engage in 15 transactions a week. Further Sara's expertise pertains to the contract in question, a 1939 Denny Wilson card.
Therefore Sara will be seen as a merchant.
??
Bill operates a store that regularly sells baseball cards. Bill's business is that of selling baseball cards and will also be seen as a merchant.
Therefore, both parties will be seen as merchants.
Contract Formation
For there to be a valid, enforceable contract the plaintiff must show that there was mutual assent, offer and acceptance, backed by consideration and that no valid defenses exist.
Offer - Bill's Phone Call to Sara
An outward manifestation of present contractual intent to be bound by the terms which are definite and certain effectively communicated to the offeree creating the power of acceptance.
Here Bill will argue that he phoned Sara and offered to buy a 1939 Denny Wilson card for $550. Under the UCC only the quantity is required to establish a valid offer but here we have most of the essential terms as follows:
Quantity - 1 baseball card
Identity of parties - Bill and Sara
Price - $550
Subject matter - 1939 Denny Wilson baseball card
The only material term which is not given in the facts is that of time for performance; under the UCC a reasonable time will be imputed as a gap filler.
The offer was communicated to Sara, the offeree, by telephone and thus created the power of acceptance.
??
Sara will argue that Bill only asked "would you consider taking $550" for the card and that she replied okay send me something in writing, which she will argue would be a written offer as contracts for the sale of goods in excess of $500 need to be in writing.
The court will have to decide whether or not Bill's phone call to Sara was in fact an offer or an invitation to negotiate. It is likely that under either party's interpretation of the phone call a valid offer was made because Sara's saying "okay" to Bill's alleged question of "would you consider taking $550" will equate to an acceptance and mere acknowledgement of the Statute of Frauds requirement that it be in writing.
Therefore, valid offer.
Termination
Termination can happen in one of three ways; either by rejection, revocation, or destruction of subject matter.
Rejection
An offeree is free to reject an offer at any time prior to acceptance by either expressly communicating a rejection to the offeror or by conduct inconsistent with the terms of the offer.
Here, Sara will argue that her selling of the baseball card to another party should be seen by the court as a valid rejection to the terms of the offer, selling Bill the same card, and that it was done prior to acceptance.
Bill will argue that Sara accepted his offer to buy the card for $550 prior to Sara's selling of the baseball card to another party and thus makes the rejection invalid.
As discussed above, the courts will likely view Bill and Sara's phone conversation as having culminated in a valid acceptance and Sara's argument for rejection will fail.
??
Therefore, no rejection.
Acceptance
An unequivocal assent to the terms of the offer.
Bill will argue, as the facts state, that he phoned Sara and offered to buy a 1939 Denny Wilson baseball card for $550 and that Sara accepted.
Sara will argue that Bill only asked "would you consider taking $550 for the card" and that she only accepted an invitation to negotiate and not an offer.
As discussed supra, it is likely that under either party's interpretation of the phone call a valid offer was made because Sara's saying "okay" to Bill's alleged question of "would you consider taking $550" will equate to an acceptance because she made no reference to needing to think about it or review the terms prior to acceptance and statement "send me something in writing" will equate to a mere acknowledgement of the Statute of Frauds requirement that a contract for the sale of goods in excess of $500 be in writing.
Therefore, valid acceptance.
Differing Terms - UCC 2-207 "Battle of the Forms"
Where a merchant sends a letter of confirmation containing different or added terms that adds to, varies or materially alters a contract the different or added terms will be "knocked out" and only the agreed upon terms will be retained within the contract unless the other party fails to reject the added terms in a reasonable amount of time, typically within 10 days of receipt.
Here, Bill sent a confirmation letter including the following term: "Seller shall provide a certificate of authenticity from the Baseball Trading Cards Association." This additional term will likely be seen by the court as materially altering the contract because the
??
typical cost of such a certificate is $100, nearly 20% of the original agreed upon price, and would significantly, or materially, alter the value of the card from $550 to $800. Bill and Sara had not discussed the additional term of a certificate of authenticity and thus no agreement had been made.
Under UCC 2-207 the additional term would normally not be allowed to enter the contract and the card will be seen to have a fair market value of $550. However, if is found that Sara did not respond to the confirmatory memo within 10 days the added term could enter the contract as she failed to object within a reasonable amount of time.
The facts state that "Bill called later" and it is reasonable to infer that the statement means he called later that day and not later that month, i.e. after 10 days. Based on this presumption the added term of a certificate of authenticity will be barred from entering the contract.
Therefore, no added term.
Consideration
A bargained-for exchange of legal detriment.
Here Bill promised to pay $550 and Sara promised to supply a 1939 Denny Wilson card. Therefore, valid consideration.
Defenses to Formation
Statute of Frauds
The statute of frauds state that certain contracts must be in writing to be enforceable. One such type of contract is that for the sale of goods in excess of $500.
???
Here, the contract was for the sale of a baseball card for $550 and thus must be in writing.
Therefore, Statute of Frauds applies.
Confirmatory Letter between Merchants
There are, however, exceptions to the Statute of Frauds that when satisfied will take a contract "out of" the Statute of Frauds. Once such exception is a confirmatory letter between merchants: a letter confirming a prior agreement to enter into a contract typically within the statute of frauds. The Defendant has 10 days to object to the confirmatory letter after which it becomes binding as a matter of law.
As discussed above, both Sara and Bill will be seen as merchants in the eyes of the court and thus Bill's unsigned, typed letter confirming the contract and identifying the parties and subject matter written on a letterhead identifying the name of Bill's business will be seen as satisfying the statute of frauds. The fact that the letter was "unsigned" is of no consequence because the letterhead will suffice as the signing and only one party, not the party to be charged needs to sign.
Sara will have 10 days to object to the confirmatory letter after which it becomes binding as a matter of law. The facts state that "Bill called her later" the court will have to decide whether it was later that day or after 10 days had passed.
Sara's argument that the letter of confirmation had no legal effect will be valid if she objected within 10 days of its receipt but the facts state that she "did not respond to it" and the courts are likely to view Sara's failure to respond in a seasonable time to the letter of confirmation satisfying the statute of frauds as matter of law.
Therefore, statute of frauds is satisfied.
?
Constructive Condition of Good Faith and Fair Dealing Between Merchants
Merchants are held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing under an implied constructive condition.
Bill will argue that Sara's failure to respond to the letter of confirmation was a breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing because a reasonable merchant would let another merchant know of their intent.
The court will likely view this as a breach of the implied constructive condition under the UCC.
Breach
A failure to perform under the obligations of the contract.
Here Bill will argue that because Sara sold the card to another party when she was contractually obligated to sell the card to him she is in breach of their contract for the sale of the card for $550.
The court will view Sara as being in breach of the contract and will hold her liable for all foreseeable damages naturally flowing from her breach absent any valid defenses.
Defenses
Parol Evidence Rule
Any oral or written communication made prior to or contemporaneous with a fully integrated writing will be barred by the parol evidence rule.
Here Sara may attempt to admit her recollection of the phone conversation to combat the legal effectiveness of the acceptance; however, as discussed above her argument is likely to fail.
????
2. What damages, if any, is Bill entitled to recover?
Remedies
Where a party has breached their contractual duties the aggrieved party is able to recover damages that naturally flow from the breach.
Expectation Damages
An aggrieved party to a contract may recover for damages they expected under the contract. The formula utilized by the court is the fair market value of the subject manner minus the contract price.
Bill will seek damages in the amount of $250 which he considers his expectation damages under the contract due to the fair market value of the card being $800. However, since that price was conditioned upon a certificate of authenticity and that was an additional term, the court may or may not allow it which would alter his ability to recover.
If the court allows the additional term, Bill will be able to recover the $250; but if they bar the additional term under the UCC 2-207 then Bill will likely only recover $25 as evidenced by the fact that Sara sold the card to another party, as-is without a certificate of authenticity, for only $575. The contract price was $550 so the difference between the contract price and the fair market value, $575, would be $25.
Consequential Damages - "Hadley v Baxendale"
The non-breaching party may recover any damages that were foreseeable at the time of formation.
Bill will be able to recover consequential damages if he has any.
????
Incidental Damages
A non-breaching party can recover incidental damages for out-of-pocket expenses naturally flowing from the breach; i.e. hiring a broker, placing an ad, etc.
Here the facts do not indicate that Bill has suffered any damages of this kind but if he were to he would be able to recover those damages as well.
?
Bill v. Sara
QUESTION 2: SELECTED ANSWER B
Applicable Law
The UCC applies to the contract involving the sale of goods. Goods are tangible movable items at the time of identification of the contract. Any contracts not governed by the UCC are governed by the common law.
Here, the subject matter is a baseball card, which is a tangible movable good. Consequently, the UCC applies.
Merchant
A merchant is a person who regularly deals in these kinds of goods or who otherwise holds themself out as having special knowledge as to these goods.
Here, Sara is a doctor who collects, buys, sells and trades baseball cards for profit, averaging 15 transactions a week. She is a recognized expert in the 1939-50 era. Though Sara is a doctor by trade, it can be established that Sara regularly deals with baseball cards and possesses special knowledge of baseball cards. Thus, Sara would be considered a merchant.
Bill operates a store that regularly sells baseball cards. Bill regularly deals with baseball cards and it would be implied that he possesses special knowledge as to these goods. Thus, both Sara and Bill would be considered merchants as it pertains to baseball cards and they will be held to a higher standard of good faith and fair dealing.
??
Contract Formation
Valid Contract
A contract is a promise or set of promises, for the breach of which the law provides a remedy, or the performance of which the law recognizes as a duty. A valid contract consists of offer, acceptance, consideration and no defenses.
Offer
An offer is a manifestation of present contractual intent to be bound by certain and definite terms, communicated to the offeree. Under the UCC, an offer may be found with the identification of subject matter and quantity and UCC gap fillers can supply any missing terms.
Here, Bill claims he phoned Sara and offered to buy a 1939 Denny Wilson card for $550. Bill will argue he sufficiently identified the subject matter and price and thus, under the UCC his offer was valid. Sara will argue Bill only asked, "Would you consider taking $550 for the card." Sara will argue Bill's language is neither certain nor definite and is only an inquiry for negotiation.
Per Bill's version of the correspondence between him and Sara, a valid offer would be found under the UCC. Per Sara's version of the correspondence, it is likely Bill's language would be deemed too uncertain to constitute an offer and would be considered an inquiry.
Though it is uncertain whether there is a valid offer per the correspondence and differing stories, an enforceable contract can be found due to subsequent conduct of the parties, discussed infra.
Acceptance
An acceptance is unequivocal assent to the terms of an offer. Under common law, the acceptance must be a precise mirror image of the offer and any additional or different
????
terms constitute a rejection or counteroffer. Under the UCC, a seasonable and definite expression will operate as a valid acceptance even if it contains different or additional terms, as between merchants, unless the acceptance is conditioned on acceptance of the offeror's terms.
Here, Bill will argue when he made his offer over the phone Sara accepted. Sara will argue her reply was, "Okay, send me something in writing." Sara will argue her response does not operate as valid acceptance as she did not unequivocally assent to any deal terms.
Per Bill's version of the correspondence, there was a valid acceptance by Sara. Per Sara's version of the correspondence, she has not provided a valid acceptance, and her communication has simply invited a valid offer from Bill.
Though it is uncertain whether there is a valid acceptance per the correspondence, an enforceable contract can be found due to subsequent conduct of the parties, discussed infra.
Consideration
Consideration is legally sufficient, bargained-for exchange, which induces current performance, is a detriment to the promisee and a binding obligation on both parties.
Here, sufficient consideration would be found if Bill is promising $550 in exchange for Sara's 1939 Denny Wilson card. This is bargained-for exchange.
With a valid offer, acceptance and consideration, there is an enforceable contract absent viable defenses.
Statute of Frauds
The statute of frauds requires certain kinds of contracts to be in writing, signed by the party to be bound, to be enforceable.
??
Here, the contract is for $550 worth of goods. Thus, the statute must be satisfied.
Merchant's Confirmatory Memo
A merchant's confirmatory memo can satisfy the statute of frauds if a merchant provides a signed memo summarizing an oral agreement, which sufficiently confirms the terms of the deal.
Here, Bill provided Sara an unsigned, typed letter confirming the contract, identifying the parties, the Denny Wilson card and the price. Sara will argue this letter does not serve as a sufficient merchant's confirmatory memo because it was not signed. Bill will argue the letter was provided on letterhead identifying the name of his business, Beyer's Baseball Cards and Collectibles.
The required signature or authentication to satisfy the statute of frauds can be satisfied by an electronic signature, such as a company logo on letterhead. This letter would suffice in evidencing Bill's intent to be bound and would be considered an acceptable authentication.
Thus, the statute of frauds is satisfied and there is an enforceable contract per the terms of the merchant's confirmatory memo provided by Bill unless Sara objects within 10 days.
Contract Terms
Additional Terms Under UCC
Here, Bill's confirmatory memo included the following additional term - "Seller shall provide a certificate of authenticity from the Baseball Trading Cards Association." Bill will argue this term is part of his enforceable contract with Sara, as Sara did not provide timely objection. Additionally, he will argue that Sara did not object to the confirmatory memo within 10 days and thus, their enforceable agreement is on the terms of the memo.
???
Between merchants, additional or different terms become part of the contract unless acceptance is conditional to the terms of the offer, the term has a material effect on the agreed upon exchange, or the offeree provides timely objection.
Here, Sara will argue the additional term in Bill's confirmatory memo is a material term, as certificates of authenticity cost $100 and significantly increase a card's value. Sara will argue her card was not certified and the parties had not previously discussed this term.
It is likely this term would be considered to have a material effect on the agreed upon exchange and consequently, the term is likely not part of the contract.
Contract Performance
Breach
A breach occurs when a party fails to perform an absolute duty in accordance with the contract terms and the duty has not been discharged.
Here, when Bill called Sara, Sara said she had sold the card to another party for $575.
Bill will argue this is a breach whereby Sara has failed to perform under their enforceable contract. Sara will argue their phone agreement was unenforceable and the letter of confirmation had no legal effect.
The confirmatory memo would overcome the shortcomings of finding a valid offer and acceptance with the phone conversation.
Thus, Sara has breached and Bill will prevail on a breach of contract suit against Sara.
??
Remedies Equitable Remedies
Specific Performance
Specific performance is an equitable remedy whereby a court requires a party to perform under the contract. Specific performance is typically awarded if monetary damages are inadequate to make the aggrieved party whole or where the subject matter is particularly unique.
Here, Bill will seek specific performance in order to obtain the 1939 Denny Wilson card. He will argue this item is particularly unique and monetary damages will be inadequate compensation.
As the facts stipulate Sara sold the card to another party, if Sara has already tendered the goods and concluded the transaction, it is likely a court would not disrupt an additional contract with a good faith buyer. If Sara has not yet tendered the goods, then a court may award specific performance if the baseball card is deemed unique.
Compensation Damages
Compensation damages must be reasonably foreseeable and the plaintiff must mitigate.
Expectation Damages
Expectation damages are awarded to provide the aggrieved party with the benefit of the bargain.
Here, Bill will seek his expectation under the contract. Bill will seek $250 in damages (based on $800 as the fair market value of a certified card). However, as the certification requirement is likely not part of Bill's agreement with Sara, it is likely he would be awarded damages based on the fair market value of an uncertified card. If the fair market value of the uncertified card is the contract price Sara had with a different
?????
buyer, $575, then Bill would be awarded the difference between the fair market value and his contract price, $25. Based on the inadequacy of the expectation damages, Bill will seek specific performance.


Question 4 Solution

Cindy v. Debbie Defamation
QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER A
Defamation is a defamatory statement of or concerning the plaintiff published to a third party that results in damages.
Defamatory statement
A defamatory statement is a false statement that when published might tend to harm one's reputation or standing in the community.
Here, Debbie claimed that Cindy was a cokehead. Doing cocaine is looked down upon and the statement made about Cindy will surely make people look down upon her. This is injurious to one's reputation and could affect Cindy's relationships, and business advantages. The statement is also false. This will be considered a defamatory statement.
Of or concerning plaintiff
In order for a cause of action for defamation to be upheld, the defamatory statement must be about the plaintiff, and the receiving party of the statement must realize that the statement is about the plaintiff.
Here, Cindy is running for the State Senate and is currently campaigning. Therefore, people in the community know who Cindy is, and recognize her face. When Debbie sent the note to Newspaper, it said "Ms. Smith is a cokehead." This, in itself, might not be enough to satisfy this requirement of the defamation claim. Newspaper might not have known who Ms. Smith was. Coupled with the picture of Cindy's twin sister, who
looks exactly like Cindy, makes it clear that Debbie was intending to tell Newspaper that Cindy was a cokehead. The newspaper interpreted the statement as being about Cindy. This is evidenced by the fact that they published an article about it later on.
Published to a third party
The defamatory statement must be published to a third party to support a defamation claim. Publication requires that the intended recipient be able to hear, read, or understand the statement.
Here, Debbie sent the note containing the statement to Newspaper, a third party. They were able to read the note written by Debbie, and understand that Debbie was calling Cindy a cokehead, by reference to the picture.
Damages
The type of damages Cindy is entitled to is dependent on the type of defamation that occurred here.
Libel
Libel is defamation that is written.
In a case for libel, general damages are presumed, and plaintiff will recover those general damages. Plaintiff can also produce evidence of other damages, such as pecuniary loss, to increase his or her damage award.
Here, Debbie wrote the note to Newspaper, which qualifies as libel. Because the defamatory statement was in the form of libel, Cindy will be able to recover general damages for past, present, and future pain and suffering. If Cindy offers evidence of her pecuniary loss she may be able to recover lost wages as well.

Slander
Slander is defamation that is spoken. In a case for slander, the plaintiff will have to prove actual pecuniary loss to recover any damages, unless the slander is slander per se. Slander per se is a defamatory statement referencing the plaintiff in a professional capacity, accuses him or her of a crime of moral turpitude, accuses a woman of being unchaste, or of having a loathsome disease.
Debbie will argue that although her statement was in the form of a note, it was not something that would be permanent. The note was later just going to be tossed in the trash, and thus wouldn't have the same effects as libel. Libel is written and damages are measured differently because it is assumed that a written statement will reach a wider audience. This little note would not reach that wide audience. Debbie would argue that this is simple slander, and that Cindy would need to offer evidence of actual damages. Debbie will not prevail in that argument because she wrote the note to the Newspaper, who she was sure would publish an article about it.
Even if Debbie prevailed in her argument, this would be considered slander per se because Debbie is accusing Cindy of committing a crime. Cindy would still be able to recover presumed general damages.
Will Debbie be liable for the republishing of the defamatory statement by Newspaper?
Debbie's liability will not stop at her note that she wrote to Newspaper: she will be liable for the information published by Newspaper, because she was the actual and proximate cause of Newspaper publishing the defamatory statement.
Actual cause
Actual cause is measured by the but-for test. But for Debbie writing the note to Newspaper with the picture, Newspaper would not have published an article about it.

Proximate cause
Proximate cause is measured by foreseeability. It was foreseeable that if Debbie supplied the Newspaper with information about a person running for the Senate, that they would publish it.
Debbie will therefore be liable to Cindy for the Newspaper publishing the information. Defenses
Qualified privilege
Debbie might argue that she had a qualified privilege to publish the information about someone who was running for the Senate because it is in the public's interest to know if the person that they are voting in to office to represent them is a "cokehead". While this might be of interest to the public if the fact were true, the statement was not true, so Debbie exceeded the scope of her privilege.
Truth
If the defamatory statement is true, it will act as a defense to a defamation claim.
Debbie will argue that the statement she published to Newspaper was, in fact, true. She stated that "Ms. Smith" was a cokehead. She included a picture of Cindy's twin sister Shelly. Debbie might contend that she was actually talking about Shelly Smith when she sent the letter. Her argument will fail. The facts tell us that Debbie does not like Cindy, and that she did not want Cindy to win her election. She sent the note to the Newspaper intending that they interpret the information as being about Cindy Smith, which they did. The statement as represented was therefore not truthful.

Constitutional privileges
The First Amendment protects freedom of speech. The amendment protects people who are speaking fact or opinion, but does not permit people to publish false, injurious statements about others freely. Due to constitutional requirements, there may be additional factors in a defamation claim if the statement was made about a public concern.
Public Concern
Here, the defamatory statement is a matter of public concern because the public has a right to know whether the person they are electing into office is a cokehead. Because this is a matter of public concern, the plaintiff must prove fault with respect to the defendant. If the plaintiff is a public figure, he or she must prove that the defendant acted with malice.
Public figure
Here, Cindy is a public figure as she is within the public eye. The public knows who she is, as she has interjected herself into public view with her campaigning efforts. Because she is a public figure, Cindy will have to show that Debbie acted with malice to recover.
Malice
A defendant acts with malice if he or she intentionally publishes a defamatory statement, knowing it is false, or published it with reckless disregard as to its truth.
Here, Debbie published the statement to Newspaper with the intent that they construe it to be about Cindy Smith, and they did. She knew that the information was false when construed that way, and sent it anyway. Debbie therefore acted with malice, and Cindy can recover damages as discussed supra.

Cindy V. Newspaper Defamation
defined supra Defamatory statement defined supra
As to the statement "Ms. Smith is a cokehead", coupled with the picture, discussed supra. The Newspaper published a similar statement, "Cokehead for State Senate?" This statement is defamatory in that it would be harmful to one's reputation who is running for State Senate to be considered a cokehead. People will most likely not vote for one who is a cokehead, and it would injure Cindy's reputation in the community.
Of or concerning plaintiff
defined supra
Here, the Newspaper published the article containing the picture of Shelly Smith, who the Newspaper believed to be Cindy Smith. The two look exactly alike, and hardly anyone was aware that Cindy had a twin sister. They included the caption "Cokehead for State Senate?" Although the Newspaper does not include Cindy's name, it can be implied that they are referring to Cindy, when the caption is coupled with the picture. The public would interpret the caption to be about Cindy, as Cindy has been campaigning for election and her face is known.
Published to a third party defined supra

Here, the statement by Newspaper was published in the newspaper, and possibly distributed, and available for purchase by the public. As discussed supra, the public would understand that the statement was about Cindy, and anyone who can read would understand the statement as saying that Cindy was a cokehead.
Damages defined supra Libel
defined supra
Here, the statement was written in the Newspaper and published to a third party, the public. The Newspaper is a fairly permanent form of publication. Damages here will be presumed, and as discussed supra.
Constitutional privileges discussed supra
Public concern discussed supra
Public figure discussed supra

Malice
defined supra
Here, the Newspaper did not intentionally publish a statement that they knew was false. They had no reason to believe the statement to be false, as there was a picture with Ms. Smith snorting cocaine. They did not know, or have reason to know, that Cindy had a twin sister. Because Cindy cannot show that the Newspaper acted with reckless disregard, she cannot prove malice. She can at best prove negligence, which is not the standard here. She will not recover from Newspaper.
Qualified privileges
Same as Debbie discussed supra
Cindy will not recover from Newspaper, but will recover from Debbie, who will also be liable for the republishing done by Newspaper.

QUESTION 4: SELECTED ANSWER B
1. What is the likely outcome of Cindy's defamation claim against Debbie?
Defamation
A defamatory statement of or concerning plaintiff published to a third party who understood it and caused damages to plaintiff.
Defamatory Statement
A defamatory statement is one that causes plaintiff to lose creditability in the community and thus causes damages to her reputation.
Here, Debbie sent Newspaper an old photograph of Shelly (Cindy's identical twin sister) wherein Shelly was snorting a line of cocaine. The fact pattern states that Debbie went to high school with Cindy and Shelly and dislikes Cindy and does not want her to win her election. Here the statement is defamatory because a published photo of a person doing drugs would be disgraceful and make the person in the photo lose creditability in the community.
Therefore the statement was defamatory.
Of or Concerning Plaintiff
The defamatory statement must be of or concerning plaintiff.
Here the statement is concerning plaintiff as she was running for election and Debbie purposefully sent a photo to Newspaper of Shelly who is Cindy's identical sister for the purposes of making Cindy lose her election. Thus the statement is concerning plaintiff.
Therefore the statement is concerning plaintiff.

Published to a third party who understood it
Here the statement was sent to Newspaper who did not know that Cindy had an identical twin sister named Shelly but rather understood it to be Cindy on the photograph because Debbie submitted the photograph the day before the election with a note that read "Ms. Smith is a cokehead." Here the facts indicate that Newspaper was "unaware that Cindy had an identical twin sister"; thus it understood that the picture was Cindy.
Therefore it was published to a third party who understood it.
Damages
Plaintiff must prove actual damages or pecuniary damages to prevail in a defamation suit unless Libel or Slander Per Se can be proven.
Libel
Libel is written defamation and damages are presumed under this type of suit because they are in written form and published to third parties and are presumed to damage plaintiff's reputation.
Here, Debbie anonymously sent Newspaper the photo of Shelly and wrote "Ms. Smith is a cokehead"; thus constitutes libel defamation. Cindy was running for State Senate; thus this type of publication would demolish Cindy's reputation in her community. She may be entitled to recover actual damages as well as any pecuniary damages she suffered from the defamatory statement.
Constitutional Limitations
When a matter is of public concern or the plaintiff is a public figure two additional elements must be proved: 1) fault of defendant and 2) falsity of statement.

Here, the defamatory statement is one of public concern as Cindy is running for State Senate and is newsworthy to the public. Second Cindy would likely be considered a Public Figure.
Public Figure
A public figure is a person who has gained recognition in the community through fame or public interest or is a central person in a political movement.
Here Cindy is running for a State Senate position and is likely a famous figure in the community as she has campaigned and traveled throughout her community for election purposes. Further the newspaper knows of her status; thus she is likely a public figure.
Therefore Cindy is a public figure.
Fault
Plaintiff must prove that defendant was at fault for the defamatory publication.
Here, Cindy can show that Debbie was at fault for publishing a false picture of her to the Newspaper. Further she can argue that Debbie knew that the picture was of her twin sister Shelly and not her.
Therefore Debbie was at fault.
Falsity
Plaintiff must prove that the defamatory statement was false. A public figure must prove that defendant acted with malice, which is the reckless disregard for the truth or falsity of the defamatory statement.
Here, Debbie knew that the photo she published to Newspaper was false because the picture was in fact of Shelly, who is Cindy's identical twin sister. Therefore Cindy may

prove that Debbie acted with malice as it relates to the truth or falsity of the defamatory statement published to Newspaper.
Damages
Cindy may recover from Debbie any lost earnings that she may have encountered as a result of the defamatory statement published by Debbie.
Defenses
Qualified Privilege
A qualified privilege is not a complete defense and may be used if the defamatory statement is in the interest of the public and publisher or it regards a public concern that the public considers newsworthy.
Here, Debbie may argue that this picture is newsworthy because it concerns the State Senate position; thus the public would likely find it newsworthy and thus the statement was a qualified privilege. This argument is not likely to prevail as the picture was not in fact of Cindy but rather her twin sister who was understood as Cindy, thus not valid. Although publicly newsworthy, it lowered Cindy's reputation and more importantly it was a false statement and done with malice on Debbie's part.
Therefore this defense will not prevail.
Therefore Cindy may succeed in a defamation claim against Debbie.
2. What is the likely outcome of Cindy's defamation claim against Newspaper?
Defamation
A defamatory statement of and concerning plaintiff published to a third party who understood it and caused damages to plaintiff.

Defamatory Statement (defined above)
Here, as noted above Newspaper republished the photo which it received anonymously from Debbie of Cindy's twin sister snorting coke. This picture is defamatory as it would lower the reputation of any reasonable person in their respective community if published to a third party.
Republishing Party
A party who republishes a defamatory statement may be held liable for defamation for republishing such defamatory statement; this includes newspapers and retailers.
Here, Newspaper will remain liable to Cindy for republishing the photo that Debbie sent them.
Opinion
A defense to a defamatory statement is that the defendant made the statement as an opinion rather than a defamatory remark.
Here, Newspaper may argue that it was making an opinion of Cindy rather than a defamatory remark as the written language illustrates "Cokehead for State Senate?" This argument is not likely to prevail as the picture is self-explanatory and the third parties would likely understand that Newspaper is saying that Cindy is a cokehead rather than giving a biased opinion.
Therefore the statement was defamatory.
Of or Concerning Plaintiff (defined above)
Here, as mentioned above the statement was concerning plaintiff as Debbie intentionally published the statement to Newspaper and Newspaper republished the

statement by publishing the photo of Shelly with the caption that read "Cokehead for State Senate".
Therefore the defamatory statement was concerning plaintiff.
Published to a third party who understood it (defined above)
As mentioned Newspaper will remain liable for the photo it published of Shelly with reference to Cindy. The people who read their newspaper article understood the photo to be of Cindy and not Shelly; thus it was understood that the photo which Newspaper republished was of Cindy, who was running for State Senate.
Therefore the third party did understand the photo was in reference of Cindy. Damages (defined above)
Libel (defined above)
Here, damages are presumed as the defamatory statement damaged Cindy's reputation in her community because a photo of a person doing drugs would lower the creditability of an individual in the community; thus the defamatory statement caused Cindy damages. Cindy may be able to recover actual damages as well as pecuniary damages sustained as a result of the defamatory statement. Lastly the loss of her election.
Constitutional Limits (defined above)
Public Figure (defined above)
As mentioned above Cindy would be considered a Public Figure because of her campaign and fame in the community. Further this is a matter of public concern; thus it

is newsworthy to the public. Cindy must prove malice on the part of Newspaper to prevail.
Fault (defined above)
Here, Cindy may prove that Newspaper was at fault in republishing the photo without taking adequate care of informing itself as to the truth of the photo. Newspaper may argue that they published the photo immediately the same day as they received it because the election day was the following day and they could not wait to clarify its truth and they were not aware of the twin sister. This argument may not suffice as Newspaper has a duty to reasonably report prompt news.
Fault is proven here.
Falsity (defined above)
Cindy must prove Newspaper acted with malice.
Here, it will be difficult for Cindy to prove that Newspaper acted with a reckless disregard to the truth or falsity of its statements because Newspaper did not know that Cindy had an identical twin sister, unlike Debbie who went to high school with them. Further Newspaper could not make a reasonable inference to its truth as the election was the next day and was in the interest of the public to know of this photo because Cindy was running for State Senate.
Falsity not present here.
Therefore Cindy may not prevail against Newspaper.

Defenses
Qualified Privilege (defined above)
As mentioned above, Newspaper may too argue that it was in the interest of the public to know of this photo as Cindy was running for State Senate and was in the interest of the public as well as the publisher; thus they had a qualified privilege. Lastly, Newspaper may argue that it did not act with malice, which is the standard of falsity Cindy must prove; thus it cannot be liable to Cindy under a defamation claim.






